 Englyright© 2016 by Diane Nemec Ignashev. Published 2016 by Northwestern University Press. Oryright© 2001 by Ludmila Ulitskaya. Published by arrangement with ELKOST International Literary Agency. All rights reserved.
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 Names: Uli͡tska͡ia, L͡iudmila, author. | Nemec Ignashev, Diane, 1951– translator.
 Title: The Kuko͡tsky enigma : a novel / Ludmila Ulitskaya ; translated from the Russian by Diane Nemec Ignashev.
 Other titles: Kazus Kukotskogo. English
 Descrtion: Evanston, Illinois : Northwestern University Press, 2016.
 Identbk. : alk. paper) | ISBN 9780810133495 (e-book)
 Subjects: LCSH: Gynecologists—Soviet Union—Fiction. | Abortolicy—Soviet Union—Fiction. | Families—Soviet Union—Fiction.
 Classification: LCC PG3489.2.L58 K3913 2016 | DDC 891.735—dc23
 LC record ava://lccn.loc.gov/2016007590
 A note to the reader: Thorted e-readers. However, e-readending on user choices. Therefore, you occasect to indents, fonts, symbols, and line breaks. Furthermore, some features of the prermissions restrictions.
 Truth is on the side of death.
 —Simone Weil
 Contents
 Part One
 Part Two
 Part Three
 Part Four
 Translator’s Afterword
 Part One
 [Картинка: _1.jpg]
 1
 SINCE THE END OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY ALL OF Pavel Alekseevhysicians. The name of the feror had attended incognito as Piotr Mikhailov the year before. In hothecary’s assistant, Avdei Kukotsky. How the surname Kukotsky originated cannot be established with certainty, but according to family legend, the ancestral Avdei had comefrom the area in Moscow known as “Kukui” where Peter I had built the German Quarter.
 Seatedly in decrees of state honors; it also can be found in the enrollment records of schools established in Russia following the Decree of 1714. By enteron graduation from these new schools, the“low-born” gained entry to the nobility. After the Table of Ranks was rivileges and advantages.” A Kukotsky figures among the students of Dr. Johann Erasmus of Strasbourg, the flines,the midwyf’s art. Since childhood, Pavel had held a secret fascination for the order of all things living. Somet-fronts three treasured volumes of the Platen Handbook of Hygienic Rules of Life (the most well-known medical reference book at the time) and settled on the floor with them in a cozy corner between the tiled stove and the bookcase. The supplements to the volumes  to reveal a fetus. Lt his studies secret from his family for fear of being caught doing something wrong.
 Just as lent hours assembling and disassembling the cardboard models of the humans and their various organs. Flap by flap the cardboard people shed theletely lifeless. It was as onder this much later.
 One day, Pavel’s father, Aleksei Gavrilovich, found his son there, between the stove and the bookcase. The boy expected to get hromised to bring his son something better.
 A few days later hublished by Sabashnikov in Turin at the end of the nineteenth century. The volume—one of only three hundred hand-numbered coplendid than anything Pavel had seen before. Inseration on some member of the Sabashnikov household. . .
 Placing the book in the hands of his ten-year-old son, Kukotsky senior advised:“Look here. . . Leonardo was the premier anatomist of his time. No one drew anatomecimens better than he did.”
 Kukotsky senior said something else, but Pavel no longer heard him. The book had opened up before him as if with a bright light that flooded his vision. The perfectisciform tibialis anterior muscle, which Leonardo referred to lovingly as“the fish.”
 “Down here you’ll farative anatomy.” Aleksei Gavrilovich directed his son’s attention to the shelves below. “You can come here and read.”
 PAVEL SPENT THE HAPPIEST HOURS OF HIS CHILDHOOD and adolescence etual motion machine was remedial arithmetic. Indeed, for the boy the world ulsating movement of living todead, and dead to living.
 After lower magnification, anything that could not be mounted on a glass slide ceased to be of interest. In the world beyond the fictures observable under his lens. For example, the pattern on the tablecloth caught his eye for its resemblance to the structure of skeletal muscle. . .
 “You know, Eva,” Aleksehysician, but he has too good a head for that. He ought to go into research. . .”
 Alekseerations. In the short ractices. Accorditals. . .
 The war wated. And so he departed, as they said in those days, for the theater of war. He was appoer: he had not had enough time to surmount bureaucratic barriers before the war began.
 Followitals. Set up erating rooms on wheels retreated through Galicia and Ukraine along with the debilitated army. In early 1917 an artatient and a nurse.
 That same year Pavel matriculated to the medical faculty of Moscow University. The next year he was expelled, due to his father having been no less than a colonel in the tsar’s army. A year later, at the behest of Professor Kalartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, he was reinstated as a student. Kalartment and took him under his wing.
 Pavel pursued hassion with which a gambler gambles and a drunkard drinks. Hutation of an eccentric. Unl. After his father’s death there seemed to be nothing else to lose.
 In early 1920 the Kukotskys’ lartment, leaving only the former study to widow and son. The un. They too had been reduced to teck.
 Eva Kazing them. She managed to stuff almost all her Warsaw furniture, dishes, and clothing into the study. Hose of the clutter, his mother only cried and shook her head: this was all that remained of her former life. Ultimately, though, she was forced to sell, and gradually she bartered away her things at the street market, shedding tears of farewell over every item from her countless trunks of shoes, collars, and handkerchiefs. . .
 Relatetty railroad bureaucrat, Pavel left home, reserving the right to use his father’s library.
 He managed only rarely, though, to make hlace. At the same termission of the old linen-lady, who remembered not only Pavel’s father but his grandfather as well. . .
 He had already turned twenty-one when his mother gave birth to a new child. Her adult son only underscored her age, which aggravated the mutton-dressed-as-lamb Eva Kazimirovna. She let Pavel know that hresence at home was not desirable.
 At that point relations between Pavel and his mother ceased.
 After a whointments were reshuffled. Professor Kalutation whatsoever as a scientist. Oddly enough, he supported Pavel and allowed hartment for his residency. In medical circles the Kukotsky name was no less well known than Pirogov or Botkin.
 Pavel’s fregnancy. The dheral regions of the circulatory and nervous systems, which he considered more tractable than higher-order functions. Latients twice a week at the clinic.
 Precicuous, in the mediastinum. He completed hatient as if all were normal, but referred her to a surgeon. Afterward he sat for a long ted cancer had come from. . .
 That day Pavel Alekseevich discovered his strange but useful gift. To hacity, but found no traces thereof.
 Over the years his inner vision strengthened, intensified, and acquired a high image resolution. In some cases he even saw cell structures, tinted, so it seemed, with Ehrlich’s hematoxylin. Malroliferation flickered with tiny crimson granules. . . Embryos eared to him as shining light-blue clouds. . .
 There were days and weeks when his intravision would recede. Pavel Alekseeverations. H inside he felt a subtle anxiety. The young doctor was, it goes without saying, a materialist with no tolerance for mysticism. He and hinning or dabbling in mystical magnetism.
 Pavel Alekseevarate from himself. He drofessional tool. Gradually arent that his gift was an ascetic and a misogynist. Even too hearty a breakfast might weaken his intravision, and Pavel Alekseevich acquired the habit of going without breakfast, not eating until lunchtime or—when he had afternoon hours at the clinic—in the evening. Physatients.
 He was a good dillaries held secrets ready to reveal themselves at any moment. . . It turned out, though, that Pavel’s personal life got in the way of his research. So, after breakrecise hands—he gently avoided intimacy, was slightly daunted by female aggressiveness, and accustomed himself to abstention. Larticularly onerous trial for him. From terfectly well that each and any one of them would yield to him at his first beck, but his intravision meant more to him.
 Guarde.
 Some of hing with sensitive fingers the intimate darkness of womanhood. . .
 2
 BESIDES THEIR HEREDITARY COMMITMENT TO MEDICINE, the men of the Kukotsky famoils of war. Htured Turkish woman; his grandfather—a Circassian; and his father—a Polish woman. According to family legend, all these women were exquisite beauties. The addremature baldness. An engraved portraower of their blood as the conduit over the centuries of the family’s traits.
 Pavel Alekseevected. Although howers. She had been brought in by ambulance, late. Very late. . .
 Pavel Alekseevich had been summoned in the middle of the night by his assistant, Valentina Ivanovna. She was a flain. She sent for h, and asked him to come. When he entered the operatretreated skin.
 He stood behind Valentina Ivanovna. Harent flame that throbbed along with the muscle.
 It was a strange sensatlained: the body he saw was one he already knew well. Even the shadow along the top of the r in every night.
 Lookerfectly structured internally was somehow awkward, but he nonetheless cast a quick glance over the white sheet that covered her to the chin. He noticed her narrow nostrils and long brown eyebrows with a fluffy brush at their base. And her chalky pallor. But his sense of discomfort scrutinizing her face was so strong that he lowered his eyes to where the undulating form of her nacreous intestines should be. The worm-shaped pouch had burst, streamus into the intestinal cavity. Peritonitis. That was what Valentina Ivanovna saw as well.
 A languart of her.
 He also could see how fragile her coxofemoral joints were, the result of an insufficiently globular femoral head. Actually, quite close to dislocation. And her pelvubis. No, the uterus was mature and had given birth. Once, at least, she had managed. . . Suppurating both strands of her ovaries and her dark stressed uterus. Her heartbeat was weak but steady, while that uterus emitted disaster. Pavel Alekseevich had known for a long time that different organs can have different sensations. . . But how could you say something like that aloud?
 Well, no more childbirth for you. . . He had yet even to imagine who exactly might give the woman dying right before his eyes cause to give birth. He shook his head, driving the haunting images from his mind. Valentouch. Pus was everywhere. . .
 “Clean it all out. . . Remove everything. . .”
 They had to hurry.“Damned profession,” Pavel Alekseevich thought before taking the instruments from Valentina Ivanovna’s hands.
 Pavel Alekseevenicillin. A thief and a crook, he nonetheless was obligated to Pavel Alekseevich. . . But would he give it to him?
 3
 THE FIRST FEW DAYS—WHEN ELENA WAS NO LONGER dyenicillin intended for wounded soldiers and twice stolen from them. She had not yet regained consciousness. She was lot in which she figured as a, if not the, central character. Carefully laleasant.
 Beso uniforms—who wanted not just for her to die, but something larger and worse than death. At the same ttion—that soon someone would come and reveal the truth toher. Over all, she surmortant than life itself.
 Once she overheard a conversation. A deep male voice addressed someone and asked for the biochemistry. An elderly female voice refused. Elena lace. . .
 Then the landscape and the ling her on the wrist. She opened her eyes. The light was so crude and harsh it made her squint. A man with a face that seemed familiar smiled at her.
 “That’s good, Elena Georgievna.”
 Pavel Alekseevart was larger than the whole; her eyes were so much larger than her face.
 “Was it you I saw there? ” she asked Pavel Alekseevich.
 Her voer.
 “That’s entossible.”
 “And where’s Tanechka? ” she asked, but dlants.
 “Tanechka, Tanechka, Tanechka,” the voices sang, and Elena calmed down. Everything was as it should be.
 After a while she regained consciousness for good. Everytheration, the ward. The attentive doctor who had not let her die.
 Vasilisa Gavrilovna visited her. A white film covering one eye, her dark headscarf tied low over her brow, she brought Elena cranberry juice and dark-colored cookies. Twice she brought Elena’s little daughter.
 The doctor at first came by twice a day, then, later, as for the others, only during morning rounds. The screen was removed. Elena now began to get up, latients, and to make her way to the washroom at the end of the corridor.
 Pavel Alekseevt her in the ward for three months.
 At the time, Elena was renting a corner of a room behind a calico curtain in a rotting little wooden house on the outskirts of town. The landlady, who also appeared to be rotttionally quarrelsome. She had already evicted four tenants before Elena. The Sanies. Except for the prower. People were packed like sardines in every crack and corner.
 On the eve of Elena’s release the doctor arrartment in an official automobile, with a chauffeur. Frantry. Vasonded to the knock at the door. Pavel Alekseevs and sewage. Not removulled back the calico curtain, and glanced inside at their beggarly nest. Tanya sat in the corner of a big bed with a big white kitten and looked at him in fright, and with curiosity.
 “Quickly collect all your things, Vasilisa Gavrilovna. We’re movrising himself.
 Mov was out of the question.
 Facked into a large suitcase and cloth bundle, Tanya was dressed, and three maidens, kitten included, sat in the back seat of the car.
 Pavel Alekseevlace. The clied an old mansion, and Pavel Alekseevich’s quarters were in an annex in the courtyard. It had once been the mansion’s kitchen and the servants’ quarters. The large stove had been repaarate entrance. In one of those rooms he now settled this family. His future family.
 The fing girl on the rigid medical examining couch and was the first to figure out where all this was headed. . . Ah, Elena, Elena, with a husband who’s still alive.
 Vasicions the next day when, after crossing the courtyard, Elena first entered Pavel Alekseevich’s house. Weak and pale as a ghost, she smlexedly, even a bit guiltily. But that day Vasroaches—those would come several days later. Amazerience of relations with the male sex could be so attuned to the stirrings of love still in the bud.
 All February it was bitterly cold. Pavel Alekseevich’s quarters were well heated, and for the first time in several months the women knew warmth. Possibly, it was the dry heat of wood the women had so missed that warmed Elena’s feelings. Whatever the reason, the love she felt for Pavel Alekseevich attained degrees she had never known before. From the summits of a new realization of love and of herself, her marriage to Anton Ivanovich now seemed flawed, artificial. She drove from her mut off the minute when she would have to tell herself the sad truth, all of which was exacerbatedby the fact that no letters had arrived from Anton for almost six months, and she herself had not written to him for a month so as not to write the truth or lie to him.
 At half past fagne in other times—and waited behind the door while Elena bathed. Then he bathed, brought a second bucket for Vasilisa Gavrilovna and Tanechka, and tossed more firewood into the stove, which they stoked almost incessantly. Vas. Elena knew that Vasilisa was an early bird who began her devotional muttering still in the middle of the night.
 She doesn’t come out because she doesn’t want to witness my disgrace, Elena surmised. And smiled.
 In the morny and free. She knew that on the way to the plant everythass until Pavel Alekseevich took her into his strong nighttime embrace. . .
 Pavel Alekseevich was forty-three years old. Elena was twenty-eight. She was the first and only woman in his life who did not drive away his gift. The fread along his forearm and said to himself:“Enough! So what if I never again see what other doctors can’t see. I don’t want to let her go. . .”
 Although a mtion. In any case, Pavel Alekseevich continued to see the colored glimmer of life hidden inside the body just as he had before.
 Probably IT had fallen in love with her too, Pavel Alekseevich concluded.
 NOTIFICATION OF THE DEATH OF ELENA’S HUSBAND, Anton Ivanovent her first night in Pavel Alekseevich’s room. The notlant. Vasarticularly for her dislike.
 That evenlaced the notice in front of Elena. Elena turned to stone. For a long ter in her hand.
 “My God! How can I live with this? ” Elena porinted numbers of the date of death. “Do you see what date it was? ”
 It was the same day she had spent her first night with Pavel Alekseevich.
 By thrived of any Slavic fleshiness.
 From that moment on her love for Pavel Alekseevich would be forever tinged with a feeling of incorrigible guilt before Anton, killed the same day she had betrayed him. . .
 Vasassed.
 “Too late for me to offer prayers or for you to be a widow.” Vasilisa began to cry.
 SEVERAL DAYS LATER VASILISA ASKED FOR TIME OFF FOR one of her mysterious absences that she more announced than requested. Havectedly. Throved tank. The rules of war did not allow for excursions about the country, and there also was no one to babysit Tanya. . .
 4
 ALTHOUGH THOROUGHLY IMMERSED IN HIS PROFESsening around him. Certae his notice. . . Although he had observed all throve, be more just. . .
 Possernatural endurance, which far exceeded that of other living organisms. Years of expert far exceeded those of animals. Had physhenomenon together?
 “I’m thoroughly convinced that no dog could ever withstand what humans do.” He chuckled to himself.
 Pavel Alekseevortant quality for a scholar: the ability to ask the right questions. . . He kept a close eye on current research unctilious law that determined the life of a human being while it was still in its mother’s womb and dictated that every observable event occurred with great accuracy—not to the week or day, but to the hour and minute. Threhensible accuracy, millions and millions of times over. Who orwhat provlayed itself out?
 Through an unnamed hed into a genius, or a dolt, or a beauty, or a criminal, or a saint. . .
 Prec from which every little Katenka and Valerik emerged.
 Herformed Cesarean sections, and removed corns, all for the same fee.
 He would never forget the text of a letter, whear. . .
 “Llowmen. It must be that the goddess-protectress Lamassu is rewriting the table of fates.”
 Pavel Alekseevich had consulted German reference books to determine who this Lamassu was who was rewriting the destinies of generations. She turned out to be the goddess of the placenta. Tharate organs and sense of a cosmic link between earth, sky, and the human body—entirely lost by modern science—amazed him. All these touchersonality, a single identity? Was it only social factors that defined generations? Might it not in fact be the influence of stars, diet, orwater chemistry? After all, Pavel Alekseevotonic children of the beginning of the century. . . He had descren mouths, angelically relaxed little hands. . . How unlike today’s children, with their tightly clenched little fists, tucked toes, and tensed muscles. Hypertonic. Wrotect the head. Children of fear. Better equed to survive. Only what are they protecting themselves from? Whom are they waiting to be struck by? What would the Babylonriest of the goddess Lamassu, have said about these children?
 Thoughts of these frled by fear. The majorunished for crimes they had not committed. Harents’ move to Altai. Even Vaserson, turned out to have her own tangled little secret. Each had somethosed.
 Wlaced by another, more immediate fear for the lives of the men who had gone to the front. They were being killed by real, age-old enemies—the Germans. Yet rewar terror: the agents of vigilance seemed to have forgotten about rich grandmothers, overeducated grandfathers, and relatives abroad. Thedeath notices that arrived made everyone equal in grief. Orphanhood, hunger, and cold drisoners. Now everyone’s future was tied to victory; no one’s dreams lay beyond it. The vut off all inevitable thoughts about the future: they were not terrified, yet.
 5
 PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH ADOPTED TANYA IMMEDIATELY AFTER the weddany childbirth.
 Other people’s children were momentary, though. You spent great energy and work on them, and then they dacifier, or a rattle.
 Already durassivity, obstinacy or laziness. But more subtle personalear in the first days after birth, when the child is recovering from the herculean effort of being born and transitioning to its new existence. He knew a great deal about other people’s babies, but nothing about the child living in his house. The discovery turned out to be astonishing.
 Tanya was barely two years old, and Pavel Alekseevich was old enough to be her grandfather. The satina of an old man’s affection for all the new things that occur in children and no longer occur in adults. He notle on her waist; he discovered that her dark hair was not one single dark-brown color, but was lighter and softer, as though of a different sort, at her hairline, onher neck, behind her ears.
 New words, new movements, everytherson elicited Pavel Alekseevich’s keen and loving interest. He never allowed hrofession.
 No, no, even arison. He said this to Elena as well: I can’t imagine another child; our little girl is a genuine miracle.
 It arents? Ey when together. Vasilisa, though she was a member of the family, was an auxiliary member of this triangle who merely lent additional stability to their existence.
 Sometoking fun at herself, the child.
 “Here, and here, and here.” She polace on Pavel Alekseevich’s scruffy cheek to give a smacking kiss in return.
 After Tanya started school, this kissing ritual turned into a farewell kiss before walking out the door. These fleeting moments of contact, seemingly quite insignificant, were the tiny nails that held their daily life together.
 Generally reserved, even wriety in both gesture and word, with Tanya Pavel Alekseevich would degenerate to senile baby talk. He smothered the chotamusovich,” “Mr. Catfish Whiskers.”
 Pavel Alekseevassion. Now and then Elena would have to put a chill on his ardor. He could walk arse stock. But hossessiveness of the child who knows no limitations.
 To Pavel Alekseevich all fabrics seemed too rough for his child’s skin, all boots would give her blisters, and all scarves would scratch her neck. He would shift his gaze to his wife, and his heart ached with amazement at how fragile and tender she was; he wanted to swaddle them both in batiste, down, and fur. . . There was a strange drotect them from drafts, crudeness, and all the vulgarity of life around them.
 By September 1944, Pavel Alekseevich’s clinic had returned to Moscow. Elena’s apartment ied by two low-level NKVD officers, and the young family found itself in the same dormitory where Pavel Alekseevich had led his lonely, humble life before the war. It was a half-basement, wh, and hardly suitable for a child. As eriods on end.
 Pavel Alekseevouses. For a long time Pavel Alekseevich’s first words on returning from work were a concerned “Did she cough? ”
 Vasilisa would shrug her bony shoulders: big deal, the kid coughs. . .
 “Unfeelulled off his huge overcoat filled with cold from outside, shooing Tanya away from the cold air when she stuck her head out into the hallway. . .
 6
 LIKE HIS LATE FATHER, PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH HAD, BEYOND doubt, the qualities of a man of state. Although herished in a war with Germany. Now, when the country agaardoned his dubious heritage. Soon after returnediatrics. The war was comtion was that he would head it. Pavel Alekseevhic situation. It was not just a quest in the birth rate. Charticularly among infants. And there was one more factor, one notquantroductive age died as a result of illegal abortions. Offted.
 Therations were the consequences of underground abortions. Contraceptractically nonexistent. Physatient was dying. If the lrocedure in the dock. Several hundred thousand women were recisely because of this law.
 The extensects.
 The project remectrum of interesting characters, from Prince Kurbsky to Chaadaev. His own father, Aleksei Gavrilovich Kukotsky, had been among them.
 Pavel Alekseevhenomenon as socially inevitable and even advantageous. He consrohibiting abortions.
 As work progressed, the project expanded and turned ia between the lines of whose fantastic constructions shone serious and very constructive ideas that were far ahead of their time. For example, les. Thedagogical methods forbidden in the 1930s and even smacked slightly of Chernyshevsky. The need for medect.
 The Mened to be the only woman in the government. For years she had been known as Workhorse, partly because ath. She even lany, was wont to boast:“Yes, it’s true, the Russian woman is a steed with balls. She can tackle anything! ”
 She was incontestably the number-one woman in the country, a symbol of women’s equality, and International Women’s Day incarnate, after, of course, the mythological Rosa Luxemburg, Clara Zetkin, Zoya Kosmodemianskaya, and the eternally youthful Liubov Orlova. All of them, Workhorse included, resembled each other in one way: they were all childless. . .
 Ine, her enthusiasm cooled. In fact, she got scared. The project looked too radical, demanded enormous financing and—and this was the main thing—risk. In many respects bl, which she regarded as the interests of the state. Intuediatrics, but in other loftier endeavors.
 Academrotein molecules. Another academromise to him to behave as required by the carrot-and-stick method. A theshinskaya, was within inches of conquering old age, and a foot from conquering death itself. The atom had already agreed to become peaceful, and rivers were ready to flow wherever needed, instead of where they so desired. Sovt an immortal bouquet from the hands of a little blond girl (who subsequently on investigation turned out to be Jewish) and smiled wisely. . .
 Ststairs? No, no, and no! At the present moment there was no way she could take stairs. What if they suddenly took it the wrong way? Besward from below, but downward from above. For the moment they had forgotten about reorganizing health care, and she was not about to remind them of it. Workhorse stalled the best she could: not a sarty’s Central Committee, and her acute inner sense said to wait. Pavel Alekseevich insisted. After more than a year of fruenned a missive over the head of the Minister of Health to the Central Committee, addressed to Politburo member N who oversaw social issues. As requ of. . . ,” but recise argumentation and devastating—both literally and figuratively—statistics.
 THIS TIME PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH LOCALIZED THE PROBLEM: he submressing issues, those concerning the legalization of abortion.
 Several months passed, and Pavel Alekseevhone call came in from the Central Committee offices on Staraya Square. Pavel Alekseevich excused himself and walked out of the staff room with a scowl. Someone had vhone calls during briefings. But this was an invitation to an audience at the Central Committee, an urgent one at that.
 Ten mulling away from the clinic. Alongside the driver sat a gloomy Pavel Alekseevich. The call had been unexpected—the most ominous kind. He was party about the urgency. Before leavared for this occasion. St by the house to say good-bye to his family. . .
 At the secured and told to leave his briefcase. Inslay a decisive role in the forthcoming conversation. After protracted explanatroceed to the meeting together with its owner. Pavel Alekseeveted corridors. Thleasant journey felt like a nightmare. Pavel Alekseeved at the house. The two guards assed at the door.
 “This way.”
 He went in. The Renoink, asked him to wait. He sat down on an austere wooden bench, spreadorts to a government buried long ago. Pavel Alekseevared himself for a long wait, but he was summoned two minutes later. By this time the alcohol had reached all the ganglia of his nervous system and released its serene warmth and calm. In a long ring.
 “Hecially the left one,” Pavel Alekseevich automatically noted to himself.
 “We famronounced monarchically.
 Both the sound of his voice and the barely evident disdain on his face communicated that the cause had been lost.
 “Nothing to lose now then,” Pavel Alekseevich thought, and slowly undid the briefcase buckles. The ause. Pavel Alekseevlaced it on the table. The uffy finger, and asking with disgust: “What have you dragged in here? ”
 It was a resected uterus, the most powerful and complexly structured muscle of the female body. Bened outward, and not yet having lost all its color in the formaldehyde, it resembled a boiled yellow fodder beet. Insrouted bulb. The monstrous battle that had taken place between the fetus, enmeshed redatory sack that more resembled some sort of sea creature than an ordinary onion, such as one might use in a salad, was already over.
 “I ask that you note: throuted onion inside. The onrout. The root system penetrates the fetus, after which it is extracted together with it. When nothing goes wrong, that is. When sometherating table or go directly to the Vagankovo cemetery. . . More often the latter. . .”
 “You’re joking. . .” The party functionary recoiled.
 “I could braled functionary. “Offond to the reality.”
 The party boss stiffened.
 “What gives you the right. . . ? How dare you? ”
 “I dare, I dare. Whenever I manage to rescue a woman after a crontaneous miscarriage’ in her chart. Because rison. Or her neighbor, who also has small children, while half the children in our country are already fatherless. Belregnancy. Metal kny water. . .”
 “Stop, Pavel Alekseevlored the by now white bureaucrat, who had remembered how before the war his wife also had resorted to something of the sort. “Enough. What do you want from me? ”
 “We need a decree legalizing abortion.”
 “You’re out of your mind! Don’t you understand that there are the interests of the state, the interests of the nation? We lost millions of men during the war. There’s the ulation. What you’re sayset.
 “Not a bad idea bringing that jar,” Pavel Alekseevich thought. The conversation, it seemed, had swung to his advantage. He had begun it correctly, and now he had to end it correctly.
 “We lost millions of men, but now we’re losing thousands of women. A legal medical abortion does not involve mortal risk.” Pavel Alekseevich frowned. “You see, roved general health in and of itself will lead to an increase in the birth rate. . .” Pavel Alekseevich’s eyes met the bureaucrat’s. “How many orphans are left behind? Orphanages also are fed out of the state budget, by the way. . . This has to be resolved. It will rest on our conscience. . .”
 The party boss gr folds forming beneath his chin.
 “Take that away. . . , the talk happens there.” He pointed at the sky.
 “I’ll leave you thecimen. Maybe it will come in handy.”
 The off his hands.“You’ve lost your mind! Take that away immediately. . .”
 “Based on lete—twenty thousand a year. In Russia alone.” Pavel Alekseevich scowled. “You’re responsible for them.”
 “You’re goortrait at all.
 “That’s because you’re not going far enough,” Pavel Alekseevich cut him short.
 That was how they parted. The specroletarian writer.
 THOSE FIRST YEARS AFTER THE WAR WERE VERY SUCcessful for Pavel Alekseeverations. Two of Pavel Alekseevils who at the outset of the war had retrained and left obstetrics and gynecology for several years returned. The number of positions in the clinic doubled. New research slots were st certain ideas that awaited their moment. He was contemplateriod.His thinking brought him very close to the idea of treating cancer with the aid of hormonal growth inhibitors. Hictures of the life of the body. Hletely unclear. It seemed to hate on their own and that life would acquire some reason. The project he was developetence.
 Despounding the threshold of the now even more guarded Workhorse to make his case that the time had come to modernize existing health care. She polade had reached her immediately), but insofar as she had not been given any direct orders, she continued to be extremely careful with Pavel Alekseevich. She even thought it advantageous to treat him kindly. Owartment in a newly constructed building for the medical elite. It was lantry off the kitchen. Vasiest of all. For the first time in her life she had her own room. Seeantry, she burst into tears.
 “There it is, my little monastic cell! God grant I die here.”
 No matter how hard Elena attempted to persuade her to live in the main room, together with Tanechka, Vasilisa refused.
 By standards of the time they were rich beyond measure. Only Pavel Alekseevare cash in the house. Twayday, after their late dinner, Pavel Alekseevich would announce: “Lenochka, the list! ”
 Elena would bring him the list of those to whom they sent monetary aid. Srovincial hole.
 Before Pavel Alekseevich’s marriage there had been no list as such: he just remembered and sent the money. But now, when hect for his big salary. Sle was rather extensive and could change from month to month, Pavel Alekseevich would look at the list and sometimes inquire about a name.
 “Musya? Who’s that? ” Hearlanation, he would nod.
 Then Elena would announce the grand total, after which Vasilisa would scurry into his office and solemnly bring out the old leather briefcase. Pavel Alekseev the banknotes. The next mornost office, and only there, at the window, handed the money over to Elena, who sent off the money orders.
 Vass. Elena thought that she was counting the money. Vasrayers. She had few words of her own, and she was accustomed to conversrayer formulas. When she experlease do this and that, so that everything will be all right. . .”
 Vasle to the other. In her eyes Pavel Alekseeved everyone, good and evil, just like the Lord God. Even mortal sinners who had taken the lives of others. That Pavel Alekseevich’s chief concern was to legalize that sin had not yet occurred to her.
 7
 AFTER TURNING FIVE TANECHKA SPROUTED AND LOST her baby fat: her face acqueared under her eyes. Her cough would go away, then come back again. They called Isaac Veniaminovich Ketsler, a friend and classmate of Pavel Alekseevich’s late father. He was more than eighty; he had worked at the former St. Vlad his office.
 Isaac Veniaminovich was renowned for his divine ears. They even looked unusual, enlarged whant’s. A fountaurted out of his ear canals, while his elongated lobes hung in long wrinkled folds. For all thlaced the wide end against a child’s back. Hatient’s squirming body.
 “We have a prointing a finger just below Tanya’s clavicle.
 “In the upper right lobe. You need to go the Institute of Pediatrics and have Dr. Khotimsky do an X-ray for you. . . On the Solyanka, Solyanka Street. . .”
 Pavel Alekseevich nodded. He knew the place well: an old structure near the Ust their transgressions from becoming newborns. . .
 Pavel Alekseevt his own restless concern.
 “Unfortunately, its.
 “She hatic. Likely, her thyroid is slightly enlarged as well. How etite? Bad, naturally. How could it be good? And vomiting? Does she vomit frequently? Heraus? From the stomach? ”
 “Very frequently.” Elena nodded.
 “A spoonful too much and she starts to vomit. We never try to talk her into eating more.”
 “As I thought,” the old man responded with satisfaction. “She’s spasmatut an ear to her stomach. “Does your tummy hurt? Here? ” He poked hot. “It aches right here, does it? ”
 “Yes, yes,” Tanechka was delighted. “Right there.”
 “That’s what it is,” Pavel Alekseevich brightened to himself. “The old man’s ears are clairvoyant. Not his eyes, not his fingers. . .”
 Strain as he might, he could not see anything this time. The p before him. . .
 Not turning off his discouraged vision, he looked at Isaac Veniaminovich. The cred his stomach. The locus was t along the mediastinum. Pavel Alekseevich closed his eyes. . .
 Tanya got an X-ray. They found something. Blood tests confirmed the diagnosis. The old pediatrician’s recommendations turned out to be amazingly old school. The chrescribed Switzerland, within means, naturally—that is, suburban Moscow Switzerland. Many hours outs in a village, she did not believe in fresh air. And, of course, good nutrition and cod-liver oil. In a word, Thomas Mann’sMagic Mountain, although Isaac Veniaminovich had never heard of it. And no medicines like that newfangled PAS: why strain the liver or overload the kidneys?
 Pavel Alekseevediatrician wanted to have his own stomach examined.
 “My dear colleague, at my age all natural processes have slowed down to the poneumonia or heart failure.”
 “He knows everything. He’s right,” Pavel Alekseevich agreed in his heart.
 THEY RENTED A BIG WINTRIFIED DACHA NEAR ZVENIgorod that belonged to a career admiral banished for the minor infraction of grand larceny to an honorable exile as chief military attaché at the embassy in Canada. That same autumn the Academy of Sclication. For some reason he refused. He could not have explained to himself why, but he had an inkling: they were offering him an awful lot these days. Would it later cost him the skin off his back? He did not even tell Elena about the offer of a dacha.
 Tanya and Vasilisa were settled at the rented house. No matter how hard Pavel Alekseeversuade Elena to quit that worthless job of hers and remain at the dacha, she refused flat out. She did not want to quit her job or leave Pavel Alekseevich by himself in the city all week.
 The dacha was huge, two-stororcelain and useless knickknacks. A pstairs and downstairs, among a herd of rock-hard wooden armchairs and chairs with carved backs. The pright with a cracked soundboard, made of rosewood with bronze detail. It could not be tuned, but they figured that out only later, after Pavel Alekseevich and the watchman had carried it into one of the two rooms they would live in—for Tanya. A teacher from Zvenigorod was hired, and she came to the house three times a week.
 Wlayed them bashful tunes learned that week. . .
 Thus passed two years. Tanya remembered the winters much better than the summers. Perhaps because winter in Russia is twice as long as summer. She would later recollect her chiano she would sit down to after breakfast while Vasilisa washed the dishes. Later Vasaths. Tanya moved snow around with her shovel until Vasilisa would offer her a new task—feeding the birds.
 The lot surroundy. Sometring about a third of a mile away to gather tasty water. A spring flowed nearer the house, at the edge of the enormous lot, but sometimes it got buried during snowstorms and the water could not break through to the surface. Every day they went to the vies.
 Tanya was constantly busy. She did not know the difference between work and fun. There was nothing forced in her life. Even cod-l as if they were undreamed of delicacies.
 Ly life in the countryside, Tanya missed first grade. She completed the frogram at home. She could read well and had mastered counting. Penmansh was more difficult. Tanya would get upset because her letters were not as beautractice books. Her recuperatlete. Isaac Veniaminovich, who could have testified to the fact, was no longer among the living.
 TOWARD AUTUMN TANYA WAS BROUGHT BACK TO THE Moscow apartment and started school, going straight into the second grade. Preparations for her first day at school were made with great labor and care. They had a school unecial occasions.
 “Just like an angel.” Vasilisa sighed devoutly.
 And  to Tanya. She herself had never attended school, and that unarticular distinction. She even thought to herself:“Beautiful enough to bury. . .” She did not mean anything bad.
 They also bought her a stack of lens. . . They even ordered new hecial shoe atelier that no one in the family had ever been to.
 Tanya had been dreamy tubercular childhood in Zvenigorod.
 On the ftember, Elena brought her daughter to school. She found the teacher and left Tanya  asters. There turned out to be too many girls to be friends with. They were noisy, but one could deal with that. What was most unpleasant was that they all touched Tanya, her braron. One even managed to grab her by her white sock. . .
 The classroom turned out to be exactly as Tanya had pictured it. The teacher pointed to her seat next to a fat little girl with braids wound in little donuts around her ears. In the mage of her notebook. She froze. Thened to her before when she filled out her lonely writing books in Zvenigorod, but now she was horrified. She had not yet recovered from her shock when her deskmate leaned over and painfully on the leg. That was when Tanya understood that the bump on the elbow had been on purpose, and she started to cry. The teacher walked up to her and asked what the matter was.
 “May I go home? ” Tanya whered.
 “You may go home after the fourth period,” the teacher said firmly.
 For the f against someone else’s will, against force in its mildest form. Until that moment the wishes of those around her had fortuitously coincided with her own; it had never occurred to her that life could be any other way. . . It turned out that’s what adult life was—submitting to someone else’s will. . . From that poected of you. . . She, of course, dress itself on her. . .
 Unt even for breaks. The gointed their fingers at her, and laughed meanly. Tanya trressing their interest in her. She could not fathom that a few months later these same lartner in line, doing class duty, or just walking down the corridor with her.
 Tanya, as ing gesture of hers, wrinkled her nose in a smile—each of her movements was immediately noticed and attracted the girls’ attention, and she became a model for emulation. Even the way she chewed on the fluffy end of her braid when she was lost in thought was imitated by all of the girls who had braids. . .
 Despite the girls’ adulation, Tanya never took a liking to school. Surrounded by dozens of l, she felt more alone than she had been in Zvenigorod. The only person who felt more left out was Toma Polosukheeling dry skin around her mouth who sat in the last row. A withdrawn, slouching little girl no one wanted to sit with. . .
 Toma did not belong to the ranks of Tanya’s admirers: interstellar distances lay between them. . .
 8
 ELENA HAD CHOSEN A MODEST, VERY MODEST, PROFESsion. But she never regretted the choice. She ler. She lencils. Even encils. . .
 All these basrentice. Then, havaces inside. Everything as it was. . .
 At t. Not just a part ain, and any uttered word.
 Her teacher had been her first husband, Anton Ivanovich Flotov, a great master—of the art, one might say—of technical drawing. They met lace where Elena was a student and he an instructor of drafting. He appeared old, well-kempt, and dull, although he was only twenty-nine. She had just turned seventeen and had recently escaped the Moscow regent her childhood. This community was Tolstoyan and directed by her father, Georgy Ivanovich Miakotin.
 Thhonic style—felt lonely in Moscow, surrounded by an alien and dangerous world. Her grandmother Evgenerson Elena was not afraid of.
 More than love, what unle. Both of them sensed thearents. They belonged to another, meek breed of human bereferred to retreat unobtrusively to life’s sidelines, into the bushes, under a stone, into the shadows, not to be noticed.
 Anton Ivanovrofession as a draftsman. Because of the revolution he did not manage to receive the German engineering training given to boys in their family. He was a flant’s school for workers.
 Cautroaching her, then met with her on Sundays for another year, and married her only in the third year of their acquaintance—not out of ardent love, but with serious intent and after careful consideration, as with everything he did.
 Elena’s parents dlanting and would not allow her mother to go. Georgy Ivanovich invited his daughter and son-in-law to join them in Altai. Thickax.
 Anton and Elena led a peaceful, quartment. Their salaries sufficed for a modest life, and Elena had never known any other. In any case, after her childhood in the commune, life in Moscow seemed free and easy. The most s, mechanical drawing.
 Elena’s bosses praable young woman. It was wrlant’s workers’ school, but she had no desire to do so. She was happy just to srised by her eagerness to work.
 Once she dreamed that Anton Ivanovointed triangle. What a phrase. But the dream itself remained and did not fade. Afterward she surmhrase must have its own geometry and that one need only concentrate in order to see it.
 There is something draftable to words, she reflected. There ress.
 She tried to talk to Anton Ivanovich about this, but he just shook his head.
 “What fantasies you have, Elena. . .”
 These dreams, however, occasionally recurred. They were perfectly senseless, contaleasant sense of something new.
 And now, when so many years had passed and Anton Ivanoven the antique German case of drawing instruments, a Flotov heirloom, and let out a sigh for the deceased Anton Ivanovich. She never forgot her guilt before him. And from time to time she still had those mechanical drawing dreams—why, what did they mean. . . ?
 PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH DID NOT LIKE ELENA’S JOB: WHAT was the point of tiresome hours sitting at the design office? He was perplexed. Elena would defend herself.
 “It’s a good job. It makes sense to me.”
 “What’s so good about it? ” Pavel Alekseevrise.
 “I can’t explain it to you. It’s beautiful.”
 “Whatever,” Pavel Alekseevich granted craftily. “It’s just very, very mindless,” he teased.
 “Oh, Pasha, what are you saying? ” Elena took offense. “There’s nothing mindless about it. Sometlex.”
 Pavel Alekseevression would change. She shook her head ls tightened into wrinkles at their corners.
 “I mean that it’s all so mechanical, no mystery.” He raised a forefinger in front of her. “There is more mystery in a single human finger than in all of your drawings.”
 She gathered his finger in her hand.
 “Perhaps there’s mystery in your finger, but not in anyone else’s. Perhaps there isn’t any mystery in a drawing, but there is truth. The most ensable truth. Maybe not the entart. One-tenth, or one one-thousandth. I know that everything has other content, not just the draftable. . . I can’t explaut down his hand.
 “It’s been said before you.” Pavel Alekseevich chuckled. “Plato said it. It’s calledeidos. The idea of the thing. Its divine content. A dlate that gives form to all worldly things. . .”
 “That’s not for me. That’s too intellectual.” Elena waved him off.
 But she did not forget Pavel Alekseevich’s words. That was hy. They used to talk about s during them.
 Pavel Alekseevride. Such a wrofound. . .
 Elena frequently had the urge to tell her husband her ideas about the“draftableness” of the world, about the dreams she had from time to time with technical drawings of all sorts of things—words, illnesses, even music. But no, no, ossible to describe.
 Two seers of the hidden lived side by side. For harency of some other, immaterial world. But both of them hlaced on all secret knowledge, regardless of how acquired.
 9
 THE RESEARCH TOPICS THAT INTERESTED PAVEL ALEKseevresentation of the fetus.
 The phrase“bourgeoers with increasing frequency, made him smirk with disgust. From hoint of view, the field of science to which he had given so many years of his life had no class subtext.
 Irreproachably honest hrase like“in scientific circles of the Stalin era. . .” or “owersonally. . .” He knew how to express hractical observations within the limitations of this cant. For hast, and had no bearing on the content of his work.
 At the beg. This was a new assault against common sense, and the attack on genetics and eugenics at last year’s session at VASKhNIL no longer seemed to him just an ominous coincidence. As a member of the academy and director of an institute, Pavel Alekseevich found himself now at a level of service that required assurances of loyalty. He was supposed to speak out publaign. The upper echelons were hinting insistently that now was the time. They also made hroject, which had been on hold for several years now. . .
 A publeech of this sort was out of the question. For Pavel Alekseeving the bounds of ordinary, albeit bourgeois, decency.
 For all hrocesses had been formed to fit a German mold. Hally by the French, but in the fields of science and technology German influence had dominated since the time of Peter the Great. The very concept of uner se.
 On the eve of the general assembly of the Academy of Schysician and geneticist, to seek his advice. A less suitable adviser would have been hard to find.
 A JEWISH DON QUIXOTE WHO ALWAYS MANAGED TO GET sentenced for someth for his third. Between terms he got several unusual (for hassed him by.
 He had done hhers. The subject of hresentation had nothing to do with genetics. Goldberg, who made a hobby of rummagace and time. The artresentation on it.
 The affair was small change, and he got only three years. How many would he have got ulation genetics?
 After gettulation genetics and gene drift. Thly fundamental scientific issues. Their quarrel was so heated that it ended in a fistfight. Witnesses to the incident said that a more comical sight than their fisticuffs would have been hard to imagine. In the heat of thonent’s tooth, and the latter—insulted and injured—took him to court. As a result, Goldberg got one year for petty hooliganism.
 Two weeks later the dartner with the knocked-out tooth. Both Levle of the ridiculous absurdity of Soviet life! —was released exactly one year later. . . Sovot for hooliganism. . .
 In the same lucky way Ilya Iosifovich dodged his next inevitable arrest. Released from pr an entirely new field of study—genetics and cotton selection. Although the wart, because cotton was raw material for thewar industry. The laboratory Ilya joined turned out to be semiclassified, and either out of negligence or error or as a result of the administration’s dimwittedness, Ilya went unscathed. . . Durkova, and in 1939—through an ironic joke of the heavens! —they gave birth to identical twins, the classic object of genetic research, to whom Ilya gave the significant names Vitaly and Gennady.
 The family resided several years in the secure zone of the classified laboratory, until the war began. Then, the ital as the head of a clinical laboratory. As a mtured by the Germans. What was most comtured, which he did not know, and the only wounded he evacuated was a staff colonel for whom a car had been ordered but which had not arrived because the road was already cut off.
 When Goldberg fosure totally out of character for frenzied, hotheaded Ilya. . .
 Through the mercy of fate he was not arrested even when, at the very end of the war, he wrote an enraged letter to a member of the Supreme Hes of German women—behavior unbefitting Soviet soldiers, officers even, who bore the lofty title of soldier-liberators. . . On learnossible. Conscriated letter.
 Goldberg, however, did not intend to bury himself in some backwater. He went to Moscow, extrecialization. After a while he discovered that the field of science that so fascinated him was almost nonexistent. He knocked about for a whent almost three years among reference books and card catalogues in German, English, Polish, Lithuanian, and Latin, the last language having been acquired by him at the Peter-Paul Schule, the Lutheran school he had graduated from. Miraculously the school survived in Moscow until the middle of the 1920s.
 Ilya Iosirations. He reread tons of books on hhenomenon and its inheritability. Genhenomena, not quantitative. Where along the spectrum did one draw the line between good abilities, brilliant abilities, and genius? Goldberg scoured the encyclopededias. Applying some clever statistical formula, he demonstrated the validity of this method of selection. Next, he worked on her century. He had cast heriod of the nobility in Russian literature.
 The next stage of his work involved finding some sort of characteristic or marker connected with genius. He was absolutely confident that such markers existed, and the question he faced was how to find them. He searched for something like farsightedness in combination with a birthmark on the right shoulder, or left-handedness combined with diabetes. . . He pahysical features, defects, and deviations. . .
 He could have fot book ten years earlier if he had not, of his own bizarre will, lashed out in an unintelligible roar against Comrade Stalin’s favorite, Trofim Denisovich Lysenko, at the VASKhNIL assembly. After growlital. . . It was there, hersonally. . .
 Once aga III disability status.
 Several months had already passed ser echelons; he had returned to his geniuses and their hereditary diseases and was awaiting an answer to his missive. Or arrest. This was the comrade that Pavel Alekseevich had chosen to advise him on“the current situation.”
 GOLDBERG AND HIS FAMILY LIVED IN A TWO-STORY wooden barracks-like structure. At one tartments. One of the apartments had been purchased by Goldberg after he returned from the front. In fact, Pavel Alekseevich had bought it. Ilya Iosing all humankind—Goldberg attributed enormous significance to his research. It was hrofound belief that science was charged with saving the world.
 “The great matereaceful conversations. But those hours of peace were sufficiently rare. Ilya Ioser scientific argument. He was capable of infuriating even Pavel Alekseevich, and their meetings usually ended in quarrels, shouting, and door-slamming. Ilya Iosinion, was worth the effort.
 For Ilya Ios of sound genetic theory the world order could be restructured entirely. In twenty years genes could be used as the bulied, and man himself could be redesigned by introducing new genes and endowing him with new qualities.
 “What qualities? ” Pavel Alekseevich inquired stiffly.
 “You name it! ” Ilya Iosifovich flung out his arms, and the thin vestiges of hair on his head stood on end. “We wossible to create mathematicians, musicians, and artists in quantities unknown evenduring the Renaissance! ”
 “Hold on,” Pavel Alekseeved him. “That’s called eugenics. We don’t need large quantities of geniuses. They’ll just w arrested and shot.”
 “Pasha, we’re living the Inquisition right now. Thassed. The future belongs to us, to science. There able of saving the world! ” His long thin hands thrashed the air, and his bulging gray eyes shone with a sickly fire. Wle on his wrinkled neck, and his slouched, bony figure he was going to save the world!
 Pavel Alekseevich shook his head, blinked, and tried to hold his tongue: he’s mad, a holy madman! All that’s missing is the helmet of Mambrino. . .
 THIS TIME THERE WAS NO NEED FOR A LONG DISCUSSION. Ilya was gloomy. After the first bottle of vodka he fell into a monologue.
 “We’re losing time. We’re losing our advantage! In the last few years several works of paramount ublished in the United States. Alfred Sturtevant laining the emergence of new genes! Where is Koltsov? Chetverikov? Zavadovsky? Vavilov! The genius Lev Ferri? Don’t you understand that this is sabotage by enemies from within? The entaign is sabotage! Therialism, Pasha! It’s their clever way of destroying Soviet science. . . Scrofit, the golden calf. . .”
 H. Moisture filled his light, red-vein-streaked eyes, then trickled from under his glasses. . .
 Thty glass, unable to get a word in edgewise. Foke.
 “Ilyusha, I think you’re exaggerating, as always. Cosmopolitanism doesn’t interest them. I thly wants to wring the Jews’ necks.”
 Valya—once a skloringly, “Ilyusha, the children. .. ,” or “Ilyusha, the neighbors. . . ,” or s it down. . .” They drank one more bottle and, as always, had a complete fallarting. Ilya Iosercent for global justice, beginning with science, and was ready to lay down his life for it. Pavel Alekseeverations about which Cicero had once addressed the Senate. Ilya Iosoint. Pavel Alekseev—he had always valued hisfriend’s inexhaustible erudition.
 “And what did Cicero say? ”
 “That,” Ilya Iosifovich shouted, “these women should be executed, because they were stealing soldiers from the state! He was right a thousand times over! ”
 At thulling on his coat angrily.
 “You’ve got a good head on your shoulders, Ilya. Too bad  on a fool. So, osed to give birth so that the bastards can send them into the meat grinder? ”
 He slammed the door on his way out.“Devil take him, the fool! ” But he remembered about Cretty well sloshed.
 THE NEXT DAY THEY SEARCHED GOLDBERG’S APARTMENT and arrested him. His denunciation of Lysenko had reached its destination.
 Pavel Alekseevich learned of the arrest only a week later, when Valya, after much hesitation, decided to call him.
 THAT LAST EVENING IN MALAKHOVKA A DRUNKEN PAVEL Alekseevened. The next mornirit alcohol and chased the hair of the dog. That brought some relle who wrote and read them.
 In the entranceway, Elena, unnerved by the late-nulling felt boots over her old shoes, getting ready to leave for work. Pavel Alekseeven his arms, and shouted.
 “My little girl! Let’s go to the stables! To see the horses! ”
 Realizing that her husband was drunk, Elena was at a loss. She had never seen him in such dissolute condition, in the morning no less.
 “Pashenka, what’s with you? ”
 Tanya, who had already put on her school unily,“Hurrah for Daddy! ”
 And flung herself on his arm. He p.
 “We’re playing hooky today! ” he winked at his daughter.
 “Call work, Lenochka, and tell them you’re not coming in today. That you’re sick. Leave way. Whatever! ”
 Something out of the ordinary was going on, something new. He was so relly with his wishes. . . Wlexed smile Elena objected weakly.
 “What stable. . . ? What horses. . . ? That’s an unauthorized leave. . .” But she was already reachhone to call a colleague and warn that she was not coming to work today. . .
 Pavel Alekseevlained,“We’re going to the Institute of Horse Breeding. Prokudin has been calling me for ages to come and look at the horses. Let’s go! Let’s go! Tanya, put on your ski suit! ”
 “Really, Daddy? ” Tanya still could not believe it. Vaseeked out of the kitchen doorway.
 “Gavrilovna! Fried eggs! King-style! ” Pavel Alekseevich ordered in a loud cheerful voice. Thoroughly perplexed, she went to carry out orders. Kast, hewent without breakfast. . .
 “And ked in, thrilled by the new adventure.
 They sat down and ate breakfast Sunday-style even though it was just an ordinary Monday. Pavel Alekseevened before, drinking in the morning. . .
 Something disturbing loomed in this morning adventure, she sensed, and following her intuition, without giving it a second thought, she asked:“Pash, you’ve got that meeting at the Academy today. . . You’re obligated to. . .”
 “I’m not obligated to! ” Pavel Alekseevich bellowed. “I’m not obligated to anyone! Let them all get. . . ! ”
 The vulgars was forceful and weighty, like everything about him. The cloth coveren collar, and the enlarged veins on his bull neck darkened. . .
 Elena embraced his neck.
 “Calm down, darling. . .”
 And he calmed down, pressing her to his chest.
 “Forgive me.”
 When they were all warmly dressed and already standing in the doorway with a sled for Tanya, Pavel Alekseevich issued instructions to Vasilisa Gavrilovna.
 “If they call, say he’s gone on a drinking binge.”
 She looked at hrehending eye.
 “Say it just like that: ‘He’s gone off on a binge.’”
 Vasilisa was clueless, but fulfilled her assignment to the letter.
 The tu tactic was ingenious. Pavel Alekseevich was not the only one who affected illness that day. But he was the only one who got away with it. He dutation as a habitual binge drinker.
 Whereas before he had drunk readublic address. He would conscientiously drink himself under the table, and Elena, who had figured out the real cause of his sudden alcoholism, would call the Presidium herself and in a sweet little voice inform them that Pavel Alekseevich could not attend because he had another one of his attacks, you understand. . .
 At partartment, where he constantly found the little notes his wife Elena wrote to herself. Touching little notes that began with one and the same words,“don’t forget. . . ,” followed by: “buy apples,” “take l. . .” What was funny was that there were so many of these notes, all of them w. . .
 He knew that Elena was not good at household chores, and her efforts not to forget anything, to get everything done on time, touched Pavel Alekseevich. His wife’s virtues delighted him and her shortcomings endeared her to him. That’s what’s called marriage. Thele who like to talk.
 Pavel Alekseevlomatic character, were hardly staged. But Elena, although worrut an end to them. Women’s intuition, not reason, as always, guided her. She knew nothecially Russian alcoholism, when the soul, finding no other outlet, finds easy and available consolation without lies or shame.
 When binges occurred, Elena sometimes took vacation time, and she and Pavel Alekseevich would head out to the dacha. One of these short holidays occurred in the autumn, two others in the winter. There were no better days in her life than these drunken holidays when he cast off all of his numerous cares and belonged entirely to her. It was the fever of youth that they had both mlicated revelations of seeming bottomlessness, where everything climaxed—about this Pavel Alekseevich longed to forget, and sometimes he managed to—with a few milligrams of a secret and measured dose of a mysterious substance inside the tunica albuginea. . . And when he no longer had the strength to extend his arm for a glass of water, everything at the bottom went cold: all of it was in vain, in vain, for there remained that insurmountable boundary they were unable to cross together. . . The only medicine was to try again and again. . .
 By heriod of sobriety would be an ordeal for her. She both feared and deep in her heart awaited the morning when Pavel Alekseevich, having drunk his first liberating glass, would say to her:
 “Get your things, dear, we’re going to the countryside. . .”
 AT THE ACADEMY IN THE MEANTIME THEY HAD STOPPED bothering him. The reputatrieve. No sassion in our country as alcoholism. Everybody drarrots. . .
 10
 IN THE THIRD WEEK OF MAY A PREMATURE HEAT WAVE set in, making everyone a little bit sick. A few more days remained until the end of classes, but the curriculum had been covered in its entirety, and grades, both quarterly and final, had been given. It was already known who the honor students were and who would have to repeat a grade. The gtiness of time and its sluggishness.
 Galrouts.
 Gal of girls for four years and had taught them everything she knew: writing, arithmetic, and drawing. Over these same years the girls had memorized both of her woolen winter dresses—one gray, the other burgundy—as well as her dark-blue suit covered with a layer of gray cat fur.
 Sanese sleeves. Most of the ged curves and growths of curly hair in the hidden regions of their bodies, while others were still thin, sexless children with gnawed nails and scratched knees. But the teacher’s new dress intrigued both the former and the latter.
 It intrigued Galina Ivanovna herself no less. She had sewn tharty to mark her fortieth anniversary as a teacher. During the class change Galina Ivanovna had even gone to the lavatory to look at herself in the mirror and straighten her collar. She had already ach in her heart she dreamed that she would be given a real award—a medal or ribbon.
 She devoted the fourth period to extracurricular reading. At foorly. Those who dossible to catch the contents. When she tired of correcting them, Galina Ivanovna took the book and began reading herself. Her voressive. She read the part about freezth and feeling.
 Only a few matient were already silently collecting their satchels. The sun scorched at full capacits.
 “A freezathy in this heat,” Tanya thought to herself, and at that same moment heard first one, then another, sniffle of someone crying into her sleeve.
 Galed reading. The entire class turned to look back at the far corner of the last row where for the last four years Toma Polosukhina had sat, insensible and indifferent to everything. She was crying over the bitter fate of frozen, lost Kashtanka.
 Desks slammed shut, and the ged from their seats.
 “Class set, Toma? Didn’t you finish reading to the end? ” She tried to calm the girl. “Everything will turn out all right at the end.”
 “No it won’t, no it won’t! ” Toma snron.
 She was one of the smallest, one of the least developed gur. . .
 The bell finally rang. Galina Ivanovna decisively closed her book. As ushing and shoving, and senselessly tearing about. . .
 Toma was st to her. Why she went up to her she herself did not know.
 “What’s wrong? ” Tanya asked.
 Tanya was no sparrow and no longspur; she was sometharent dragonfly. And both of them knew perfectly well who was who. . .
 But that day Toma was gos, elevated Toma above the rest of the world, and for that reason, this little girl who had never said anything about herself and who would never be of interest to anyone said:“My mom’s dying. I’m afraid to go home. . .”
 “I’ll go with you,” Tanya offered fearlessly.
 Were roud and rejoiced that Tanya was going home with her, but today she almost did not care. . .
 They passed through the schoolyard, wherished in 1944. It was a former garage, with a regular door cut through the garage door. Toma stopped ushed the door.
 It was the stench that hit first. The place reeked of sour dampness, urine, and kerosene, all of it rotten, decayed, and deathly. . . Two ped with wet linen. At the far end, under a w a Russian stove.
 At fty, but when her eyes grew accustomed to the semidarkness, Tanya could make out a tiny head in a thick headscarf. Next to the bed stood a basin filled with brown linen. The groached the bed, the source of the horrible smells.
 “Momma, Mom,” Toma called.
 A groan could be heard coming from the scarf.
 “Maybe you want something to eat or to drink? ” Toma asked, her voice full of tears.
 There was no answer, not even a groan.
 Toma pushed the smelly blanket to the side: the woman was lying on a red sheet. Tanya did not realize immediately that this was blood. The brown losure to the air.
 “She needs an ambulance,” Tanya said firmly.
 “She won’t let me call an ambulance,” Toma whered.
 “But there’s a lot of blood; she’s hemorrhaging. . .” Tanya was surprised.
 “Yeah, she’s hemorrhaging. She scraped herself out,” explained Toma. Not sure that Tanya would understand, she explaes herself out. She scraped too far this time.”
 Toma sniffled. Tanya winced: bang, screech, crash. . . The walls started to float, her depth percepted before her. . . Life was caving in on her, and Tanya understood that from this moment she had left her former life behind her, forever. . .
 “I’ll call my dad, that’s what. . .”
 “That’s what you say. He won’t come here.”
 “Wait. . . I’ll be back soon.”
 Wartment. Her mother was not at home, and Vasened the door.
 “You gone berserk? ”
 Not answerhone to call Pavel Alekseevich. No one p for a long time, then a voice told her that he was in surgery.
 “What happened? ” Vasilisa Gavrilovna tried to get her to answer.
 “Ah, you wouldn’t understand.” Tanya waved her off.
 It seemed to her that she must not reveal thart, as hers had. The secret had to be kept safe. . .
 “I’ll be back soon,” she shouted from the threshold and, slamming the door, dashed down the staircase.
 Tanya remembered only vaguely how, not waiting for the trolleybus, she ran to the metro station, rode to the Park Kultury station, then ran once again down long Pirogov Street. It seemed like her running was infinite and went on for many hours. At the secured her.
 “I’m going to see my dad, Pavel Alekseevich. . .”
 They let her through immediately. She tore up the sta. A whole brood of doctors and students m-rosy face and gray-tufted bushy eyebrows. He caught sight of Tanya. It seemed as arted in front of him.
 “What happened? ”
 “Toma Polosukhina’s mother is dying. She scraped herself out! ” Tanya blurted.
 “What? Who let you in here? ” he roared. “Go downstation area! Wait for me there! ”
 Tanya flew downstaing down her tears.
 For all his bravery, he had taken fright. One denunciation would be enough to turn his life to hell. . .
 Three mtion area. Tanya rushed over to him.
 “Daddy! ”
 He stopped her again with his gaze.
 “Now explaened to you.”
 “Toma Polosukhina, Dad. . . We have to hurry. . . Her mother is dying. . .”
 “Whose mother? Who? ” Pavel Alekseevich asked coldly.
 “Our janitor, Aunt Liza. They live in the garage, behind our house. She scraped herself out, she did. . . Dad, it’s terrible there. . . Dad, there’s so much blood. . .”
 He removed his glasses and rubbed the ridge of his nose. The phrase“scraped herself out” from Tanya’s ls. . .
 “Okay, listen. . . Go straight home.”
 “How? ”
 “The same way you got here.”
 Tanya could not believe her ears. It was as laced by someone else. He had never spoken to her with such an iron voice.
 Slouched, she went outside. . .
 Thirty minutes later Pavel walked into the Polosukhin garage. His assistant Vitya was with him. The driver of the ambulance they had arrived in did not get out.
 As soon as he set eyes on her, Pavel Alekseevrofessional concern. . . A wartt around. . . He touched the lened an eyelid with his finger. There was nothing to be done here. Near the bed stood the three kids, two little boys and a girl, who stared at him with big eyes.
 “Where’s Toma? ” Pavel Alekseevich asked.
 “I’m Toma.”
 Pavel Alekseevich looked at her closely: he had taken her at first for a seven-year-old, but now, having got a better look at her, he understood that she was indeed Tanya’s classmate.
 “Toma, take the boys upstaartment number twelve. In the big gray house. You know where? ”
 She nodded, but did not budge.
 “Go, go. Vasilisa Gavrilovna will let you in. You tell her that Pavel Alekseevich sent you. Tell her to set the table. I’ll be there in a second.”
 “Are you takital? ”
 He used his mighty figure to block their view of the bed and the miserable woman who was no longer.
 “Go, go. We’ll do what needs to be done. . .”
 The children left.
 “Well, we’ve gotten ourselves into a mess. . . She has to be taken to the morgue. . . ,” the asslored.
 “No, Vitya. We can’t take her to the morgue. I’m going to send Vasilisa Gavrilovna down here. She’ll be the one to call the ambulance and the militia. . . We were never here. . .” Pavel frowned. “You know yourself I’d take her if she were still alive. . .”
 Vitya knew it all too well. Actually, all doctors knew how close this came to the criminal code.
 Ls forever. After Vassy, scandal arose on two fronts—one having to do with housing, the other with medicine.
 There were three se. The day of the death Kostace would not get away from them. The second contender was the electrician from the house management office, Kostya Sichkin, who was tired of living in a seven-by-four-footroom with three children and a fourth already on the way. There was one more contender, also not an outslanning to get married, and waited in combat readiness. Other mgrade, but they had no chances whatsoever.
 On the medical front things were more serious. The autopsy showed that Luncture. . .
 Accorderforming the abortion: in the case of a lethal outcome doctors were given ten years, twice as many as an amateur. Which had a certain justice.
 The whole neious trade: Granny Shura Zudina and the Moldavian woman Dora Gergel. The former was ser. She gave an injection and inserted a catheter. Usually it worked. Sometarticularly muscular women or those who had never given birth, it did not. In which case Granny Shura shrugged and did not take any money.
 Dora was a trained medic, and did everything by the book, with no misfires. She had moved to Moscow from Kishinev after the war. A swarthy beauty wicious but undiscerning neighbors took her for a Jew. She had a knack for anythlace for her, she quickly figured out what was to be had where, even when food was still being rationed. She got a job as a nurse loma was counterfeit, not even written in Russian. She performed real abortensive. Rle went to her, and Liza could hardly have afforded her. So the neighborhood concluded with no uncertainty that the whole mess was Zudina’s doing.
 The next day, an  in the courtyard. The“partment” was searched, but no instruments or medications were found.
 “Yeah, right, like the idiots are going to leave a trail of evidence,” the yard joked. The ector, a young kid with a thin neck, interrogated the neighbor women and blushed. No one said anything. But, as always, an. Zudion of the truth.
 “I won’t say what I don’t know. In Lered directly in the investigator’s ear.
 “Did you yourself ever use her? ” the ector inquired.
 “God forbleaded.
 “So how do you know? ”
 Here the Rake led hly.
 “Whattcha need, Nastya? ”
 “Notheck. Around here you can’t sigh or fart without your neighbors knowing. . .”
 The ector wrote it all down in his notebook and left: now he had a lead.
 The atmosphere of eaceful abode. It all started the evening of the day Lizaveta was taken away. The Polosukharents’ bedroom.
 Only the adults gathered for a late dinner—Pavel Alekseevich, Elena, and Vasilisa Gavrilovna, who, though reluctantly, occasionally sat down at the table with them. For thecial—a holiday or some event, like today’s. She preferred to eat rayers.
 Havent so many years trying to legalize this? ”
 “Legalize what? ” Elena, sunk in her own thoughts, asked. Polosukheace.
 “Legalize abortions.”
 Vasot: her world was shattered. Pavel Alekseevich, whom she so esteemed, was, it turns out, on the side of criminals and murderers, working on their behalf, on behalf of their shameless freedom. And he was a murderer himself. . . But that was ossible to imagine. . . How could it be?
 Pavel Alekseevlain. He was good at that.
 Vass and said nothing. She d aside, but she did not go to her room. She just sat there, silent, not raising her eyes.
 “It’s horrible, horrible! ” Elena lowered her head to her hands.
 “What’s horrible? ” Pavel Alekseevich was irritated.
 “It’s all horrible. That Lizaveta died. And what you’re saying. No, no, I’ll never go along with it. It’s legalized infanticide. It’s a crime worse than murdering an adult. A defenseless little. . . How can they make that legal? ”
 “Here we go: Tolstoyerance. . .”
 She unexpectedly took offense on behalf of Tolstoyism.
 “What does vegetarianism have to do with it? That’s not what Tolstoy meant. Three of those creatures are sleeping in Tanya’s room. If abortions were legal, they too would have been murdered. Lizaveta didn’t have much need for them.”
 “Are you feeble minded, Elena? Perhaps they wouldn’t exist. Then there wouldn’t be three unfortunate orphans doomed to poverty, hunger, and prison.”
 For the first time in ten years a serious quarrel was setting in between them.
 “Pasha, what are you saying? ” Elena was horrified. “How can you say such things? Maybe I am feeble minded, but the mind has nothing to do with this. They’re killing their own children. How can that be allowed? ”
 “And how can it not be allowed? They’re also killing themselves! And what do we do with them? ” He pot, children their mother had not succeeded in getting rid of in time. “What would you have done with them? ”
 “I don’t know. I only know that you cannot krotest and irritation.
 “Think about the women! ” Pavel Alekseevich shouted.
 “Why should we think about them? They’re crs.
 Pavel Alekseevich’s face turned to stone, and Elena understood why his subordinates feared him. She had never seen him like this.
 “You don’t have the right to a vote. You don’t have that organ. You’re not a woman. If you can’t get pregnant, then you can’t judge,” he said to her morosely.
 Theiness—easy and unstrained, their chosenness and their closeness, their unlimited trust for each other, all of it came crashing down in an instant. But he seemed not to understand. Vasilisa directed her single eye at Pavel Alekseevich.
 Elena got up. W into the sink. The cup was old, with a long crack running through it. Coming in contact with the bottom of the sink, it shattered. Leaving the shards, Elena left the kitchen. Slouchantry.
 Pavel Alekseeved in his tracks. No, so it was cruel. How could she passion for unfortunate Lizaveta? Who was she to judge. . . ? Let her think. . .
 Elena thought all night long. She cried, and thought, and cried again. Alongslace, lay warm little Tanya. Pavel Alekseevich went to his study.
 Vas. She did not think. She prayed and cried. Now Pavel Alekseevich was the villain.
 Pavel Alekseev several times, troubled by vaguely dark dreams. He tossed and turned, draggery sheet off the leather sofa.
 Morning began very early. Vasot. She announced that she was leaving them. It was not the first time. It happened that Vasay. Usually, havear for several days, but return soon after.
 “Do whatever you want,” Pavel Alekseevich blurted, not yet recovered from yesterday.
 HE FELT MISERABLE AND EVEN OPENED THE CUPBOARD and looked inside. There was no bottle. He did not want to send Vasilisa and, besides, it was still too early. He poured a glass of tea and went to his study. Elena did not come out of the bedroom. Vasilisa gathered her things. In Tanya’s room Lizaveta’s children were waiting for breakfast and tussling over toys they had never seen before and that belonged to someone else. Toma was trying to get them to argue more quietly.
 When Elena came out to the keared at the stove dressed in a new sweater and new scarf and with a mournful and solemn look on her face.
 “Elena, I’m leaving you.”
 “What are you doing to me? ” Elena gasped. “How can you leave me? ”
 They stood there, looking at each other, both tall, thin, and severe. One an old woman who looked older than she  in age, but still looking twenty-eight.
 “You do as you wish, but I’m not living with him anymore. I’m leaved.
 “What about me? ” Elena lored.
 “He’s your husband.” Vasilisa darkened.
 “Husband. . . shmusband,” was all Elena said.
 She could not haned children in the house. Elena persuaded Vasarture at least until the fate of the Polosukhin children was decided.
 “All right,” Vasilisa said gloomily. “As soon as we bury Lizaveta, I’m leaving. Start looker, Elena. I’m not living with him anymore.”
 THE FUNERAL TOOK PLACE ONLY ON THE SIXTH DAY, after the autopsy had been completed and they had established scientifically what had been clear without it. The relat from sister-in-law to godmother. The one crooked little man called himself a brother-in-law. When she and Toma once dropped lain who was related to whom.
 The entire Polosukhin clan came from the region around Tver, but from different villages—the father’s village and the mother’s village. Toma’s bon Lizaveta.
 You might even say that her relatives were feuding. These people quarreled no something mysterious called a“carucate” and a “half-carcass”. . . It all sounded leaking another language. Tanya got the  things for fun. . . But they were divvying for real. . .
 ELENA PLANNED TO TAKE TANYA WITH HER TO THE CHURCH service and the burial, but Pavel Alekseevich would not allow it. Elena thought that Tanya should go because of Toma:“just to stand alongsened their silent enmity. He insisted, he grumbled, he demanded that Tanya be left at home.
 “She’s an ressionable child! Why are you dragging her into all this? It’s a profanation! I can see Vasilisa! But what’s Tanechka going to do there? ”
 “And what makes you think you have the right to a vote? ” Although meek and not at all vindictive, she nonetheless delivered a shattering blow. She herself did not know how it came out. “You aren’t Tanya’s father, after all. . .”
 It was mean revenge. The blow hit its target. It was one of those rare cases where both duelists lose. No one survived.
 But Tanya derature and stayed in bed.
 The day after the funeral Lhews with her. Accordosed to take Toma. But someth girls crowned with wreaths of cornflowers and daisies exchanging rings of fur. Tanya could not understand what sort of problem there could be with furrings. But soon Fenya herself showed up—a large, dark-haired woman who resembled her tiny fair sister only in her rare unattractiveness.
 She sat for a long tots of tea. They agreed that for the time being she would leave Toma here, in the city, and as soon as she was done with the furrings, she would come to fetch her. All through the conversation Toma stood hunched in the corridor with her bulging school satchel and her winter coat bunched in her arms, awaiting their decision.
 Late  than with the other members of the family, including Tanya. Toma looked Vasilisa in her one live eye and fingered her hem.
 “Aunt Vas, I can wash floors and do laundry. And stoke the stove. . . I don’t want to live at Fenya’s: she’s got enough of her own. . .”
 Vasressed the girl’s head to her side.
 “You silly bird. We don’t have a wood-burning stove. And we don’t wash the floors ourselves; the floor pololishes them. But don’t you worry: there’s more than enough to do in this house. . .”
 BUSY WITH THE FUNERAL ARRANGEMENTS, ELENA HAD forgotten Vasilisa’s words about leaving. Over the past few days her quarrel with her husband had hardened, as if having grown a scab. They almost never spoke—only about household necessities. The f in their house, before their quarrel, Elena had made her husband’s bed in his study and taken Tanya into the room with her. At that po. . . And so it remained the whole week, until Lizaveta’s funeral.
 Who knows: if the necessity had not arisen, might Pavel Alekseevich have found words and gestures to soften the insult, and would his wife, reassured of her husband’s love, have had a good cry on his broad, hairy chest, and would everything have returned to usual. . . ?
 The morning after the funeral Elena found Vasilisa Gavrilovna in the kitchen dressed in the new silk headscarf they had given her at Christmas and wearing new shoes. . . She sat up straillow.
 Elena sat down next to her and started to cry. Vasaring to take communion. Silence.
 “Where are you going to go, Vasenka? ” Elena had not expected such resolve from Vasilisa.
 “Wherever it was I came from that’s where I’m going back to,” Vasilisa answered sternly. “God be with you, Elena.”
 Vasilisa looked straight ahead, one eye white, the other blue. A hideous gaze.
 “Does she really not love us at all? ” Elena was horrified by the thought. She took from her purse all the money she had and silently handed it to Vasilisa.
 Vas her belongings, and set off. . .
 Just like that. As ent twenty years together with Elena. Deared, without saying good-bye to Tanya, or Pavel Alekseevich. Without looking back.
 11
 VASILISA KNEW EXACTLY WHERE SHE HAD COME FROM and where she was going: from the soil to the soil. Puttloyment.
 The cected: girl got no luck and no smarts.
 Her older brother and the sarents and left. Her older sister Dusya worked as a domestic in Moscow, and her brother Sergei was married in the neighboring administrative district.
 The first misfortune to befall Vasilisa occurred very early. She was two years old when the only rooster ecked her in the eye. The led, but no one noticed. A wh on her eye, and by the time she was seven the eye was entirely clouded over by a white film.
 Year by year Vasoorer, fell ill, and when Vasilisa was ten her father died. Her wering farm near Kozelsk. At her brother’s place mother and daughter were treated like extra mouths to feed, told to live inthe bathhouse, and not invited to the table. Vasractically the garden alone. Sergei would bring them bread on holidays or when he was in a good mood, after he had drunk wine.
 About thered, although already on its way to decline. Sparticular value to the owners of inns and taverns, not to mention the monastery’s own hotels. People came there on foot from all over Russle of all social castes. One of the roads passed through the village where Vasilisa’s brother lived. But he drofit from their conveniently located living quarters. Just the opposanhandled, or walked off with anything that was not chained down. The majority of those streaming by on foot were beggars and half-beggars, monks and half-monks, and Vasilisa’s brother hated all of them and considered them rabble and idlers. Sergei himself had never been to the renowned site: he attended services at the village church three times a year, and of all the church’s dictums he observed only one: he never worked on major feast days.
 Vaserament had changed after a girl he had fallen in love with rejected him. Theity on no one—not on his wife, or his children, and even less on deformed little Vasilisa. That winter their mother caught cold and died. Vasilisa remained with the large family, for whom she was only a hindrance.
 Soon after her mother’s death a netina Pustyn. Vasleasure nor relief. But on the way back a mossible to describe because it was so small and insignificant, just Vasilisa’s size. Her fellow travelers dec. She had not slept long when she was awakened by voarted and a wide ray of sunlight as thick—and just about as heavy—as a log broke a hole through the clouds and fell on the field right in front of her, illuminating a circle on the ground .. . Basically, that was the whole miracle. She knew that the circle was Jesus Christ, who was alive and loved her. In addicture had been so three-dimensional and unlike anything that she had ever seen in her life.
 The entire way back she sobbed softly, and her kindly neighbor decided that the little girl had worn one of her feet ragged. She removed the scarf from her head and told her to wrap her foot with it. Vased the rest of the way back, because the headscarf made her bast shoe too tight and squeezed her foot.
 Vasring he sent her to their sister Dusya in Moscow. Dusya wanted to find her some sort of job. She arranged for her to be taken on as an apprentassionate woman of German origin named Lizelotta Mikhailovna Klotske. As soon as she saw Vasilisa’s white eye, she realized that the little girl would never make a decent seamstress: even with two good eyes twenty years of work weakened the women’s eyesight. But she did not let her go immediately, allowing her to stay on and try to acquire a skill. Although Vasilisa was only fourteen years old, rural life had so coarsened her fingers that they could not hold the small needles and thin threads. When they assigned her to ironing, that too turned out to be not entirely easy. Wleats were crooked and uneven, and they’d have to be soaked again and dried. . . See.
 Vasointed out to her. But once she saw what needed to be cleaned, she would scrub not just unted. . . She ding. And how would she know, having lived her whole life on a dirt floor. When they told her, she spr all the dirty water. At this trade, too, Vasilisa turned out to have“no smarts.”
 Lut her out on the street, so she decided to consult her old girlfriend from school days, Evgenia Fedorovna Nechaeva. She brought Vasrudny Lane. A certaelled these old friends to care for her.
 Although she was rather tall and had long legs and a ft her large, coarse hands folded against her chest. Her face was long and ellsoidal, her gaze mournful and severe, her nose thin and longish like her face, her skin a swarthy rose color, smooth, like enamel. . . In a word, not a pretty village face, but a Byzantine countenance.
 “Not your typical look,” Lizelotta said to Evgenia while the girl was being fed in the kitchen, “and not at all Russian. Interesting. Poor thing has lost an eye. . . Thut to? She’s a very diligent girl, but entirely unfit for our business. She’s also not su, I think. . .”
 OVER GENTEEL CUPS OF COFFEE THE TWO OLD FRIENDS dec—Anechka Tatarinova, who soon after graduation from school had lost her fiancé, entered a monastery, and for a number of years already had been abbess at a small monastery in the N administrative district. . .
 Vasortation was found: a family of acquaintances was traveling to visit the abbess. They asked them to take Vasilisa along. Vasilisa carried a letter to Mother Anatolia, formerly Anechka, written by her old school friends. The letter contahan. “Take part” was already etitioners was successful in her own way. . .
 The fam, feasting her fingers on the unusually soft feel. Then tea was served, but when they offered her some, she grabbed the glass so awkwardly that it fell out of the glass holder. The hot tea scalded her leg, but the paarison with her horror at having broken the glass. . . Her karalyzed by grief, as if she had destroyed not a glass but a living creature.
 Toward evenoor Vasilisa once again reeled from magnificence she had never known. She was gkin. The beds where they slept had such whillow. . . All thulence gave Vasilisa no joy and only frightened her.
 Early the next morning they set off in two wooden sleighs. Both the sleighs and the horses were handsome, entirely unlike her brother’s in the village. Riding in the sleighs was more what she was accustomed to and more fun than on the train. The monastery was fringtime sun that blinded your eyes and tickled your nose. . . It was the eve of Candlemas.
 The horses sped gaily down the smooth road as if they too were gladdened by the sun. Vasart from her.
 The monastery appeared behen bell tower that stood out artfully against the blue, rock-hard sky. . . The sudden beauty of th. Tears streamed from both her eyes. Her left eye could not see, but it could cry.
 The sleed at the closed gates. The sected.
 “The house has been prepared for you. . . Reverend Mother has been waiting for you since yesterday evening.”
 OTHER GUESTS WERE ACCOMMODATED IN THE SMALL monastery hotel, but the abbess received those in her inner circle, this family and several others, relatives, in her small house next to the church.
 The family’s little girl, about seven years of age, demandedkissel as soon as she got out of the sleigh. The gatekeeper stroked the fur on her bonnet:
 “Go to the refectory, my child. Reverend Mother said to leave some bread andkissel for you. . . Just then a small, lean woman in a tall, stiff black velvet headdress and wool habit came out. Vasilisa understood that this was the abbess. . .
 The famorch. Vasilisa was last in line. Greetoorly dressed little girl whose short arms with coarse red hands were folded across her chest.
 They’ve brought their new domestic with them, the abbess decided, and beckoned the little girl to come closer. The little girl’s clear, seeing eye closed from fear and the other one shone white as the abbess removed her fluffy black mittens and extended them to Vasilisa. Vased them on the snow. The seven-year-old little girl who stood alongside her laughed into her fur collar. . .
 And so t Vasilisa.
 Vasilisa began her monastery life at age fourteen: the first two years she was a worker, then she became a novice. Her novitiate was always connected to chores: in the kitchen, the cow barn, and the fields. They trecial womanly talent for gold embroidery. As before, she consortant being, not worth the food she consumed. It was precossessed of any redeeming qualities in the eyes of the other residents of the monastery.
 The abbess began to teach Vasilisa to read, at first Russian, then Church Slavonic. Learning came to Vasilisa with great difficulty. Mother Anatoltionally learning-disabled girl. Every day, ent an hour in the abbess’s room. She placed her light-blue notebook on the edge of the table and looked at Mother Anatolia with a devoted and fearful gaze. Inclle languages, the abbess marveled at the intricate variation in human abilities. There was no doubt that Vasidity. Before Vasronounce a word correctly.
 “Vasilisa, what does ‘this day’ mean? ” Mother Anatolia would begin Vasilisa’s lessons with this question.
 Uncertalied.
 “In the afternoon? ”
 The abbess shook her head.
 “Yesterday? ” The embarrassed pupil turned crimson.
 “‘This day’ means ‘now, at this time, today’. . .”
 “This day the Maiden gives birth to the Transcendent One. . .” the teacher repeated rayer.
 Vasainfully searched the low whitewashed ceiling for an answer to the question,“What does ‘this day’ mean? ”
 Havidity of Vasilisa’s brains, the abbess now and again would conclude that she was dealing with a certain kind of mental retardation. And by thtion to the rule of total global illness.
 In addward and cannot be made to break this habit. But ed in a rare virtue, which the abbess also discovered in her ward. The soul of this backward girl harbored an inexhaustible well of gratitude, a rare ability to remember every kindness shown her, and a noble amnesia for all insults and injuries. Surprted as deserved.
 Monastression, violence, and sin. These were spect. Within the walls of a monastery human relations acquired much greater significance, and much more acute forms. Sympathathies, jealousy, envy, and hatred festered, sealed within the confines of strictly regulated behavior.
 The abbess knew perfectly well that Vaslaint from her doltish little novice, who exuded only incessant gratitude. Haverienced vision, Mother Anatolia wondered: what sort of miracle was this deformed little girl with neither beauty nor talent, yet so richly blessed with the rare gift of gratitude? “A humble soul,” the abbess decer. . .
 Vast on a narrow bench in the entranceway, at the door to the abbess’s room. At f every ten minutes, like a nursing mother who constantly imagines that her child has begun to cry. When she woke up, she would rush to the locked door of the abbess’s room, on the way overturnile—the tiled stovein the abbess’s room was stoked from the entranceway. . . She often woke the abbess, whose sleep sted. For the longest t. But Vas usually only after she was already standing near the door, frightened by the noise she had made and only then remembering the Reverend Mother’s instructions. . .
 For all her d tea “genteel-style.”
 In the fourth year of Vasriest and father confessor who had lived at the monastery for many years died. A new priest arrived, Hieromonk Varsonofy. He was young—barely more than ths, and eyelids that folded over his dark Byzantine eyes. . . He the church hierarchy itself came from.
 Father Varsonofy taught church history and liturgics at the administrative district seminary and came to the monastery for brief visits, occasionally missing a week or two if he was having a difficult semester. The abbess treated hectfully, even deferentially, and though usually reserved and of few words, he would often drink tea and engage in conversation with her. Despeasant. She held the new prerson who took an interest in life beyond the monastery’s gates.
 Mother Anatolosition toward Lutheranism.
 At the ternicious.
 Serving them at the table, Vasilisa was constant witness to their conversations. Removlace. . . She remembered well the backbreak, abating only briefly in the fleeting warmth of July and August.
 The last summer before the war Father Varsonofy left them for three months to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. Dur. He returned sthical names. . .
 Vasernaum, where the Lord himself had been. For her the abstract written word now acquired flesh and smell. The smell that came from the monk hregnated his clothes, and the tablets that he chewed to soothe his tormenting toothache. Vasreserved them as if they were relics. She even came to regard herself wect as someone who had seen someone who had seen the Holy Land. . .
 And so, over the next two years, sitting at the door like a bewitched mouse, Vasilisa learned of the course of Russian history—about unsuccessful military decisions and the abdication of the tsar. . . There, on her bench, she also learned about preparatatriarch, and about the revolution. . .
 In the summer of 1917 Father Varsonofy was summoned to Moscow. But he did not forget the abbess and sent her letters from time to time. At the begatriarch, and his own concelebration of the Eucharist with Patriarch-elect Tikhon at the St. Nicholas Cathedral on Nikola-Vorobievsky Lane. He made fleet the evening before. The abbess shared thiece of news with Vasilisa.
 “Is an apostle h? ” Vasudence.
 “An apostle ied Vasilisa.
 Several months later the abbess receelling, of changes brought on by the revolution. Even after studyeech. In the letter, wrersecutions have begun. It will come unto us to be witness to it as well. Rejoice! ”
 The next mornlanation. From holitan Vladimir. . .
 “They’re closered, blessing the abbess on her way out.
 Reverend Mother was terrare the monastery for the uncertain and, it went without saying, sorrowful changes she now awaited. But she could not possending disaster. A few tharchy library. She had already come to terms with the idea of closing the monastery, but could not imagine closing the ancient church.
 She gathered the noversecutions commenced. Four novarents’ homes. But all the nuns decided to remain. The abbess announced to them that tath for the majority of them should be to go out into the secular world and while living in that secular world nonetheless remain sisters to each other and brides of Christ.
 That was all Mother Anatollishing. Several days before the monastery was closed, they came for her. She was taken to the prison in N. Vasilisa asked to go with her, and the authorities benevolently agreed. The abbess prepared herself for the worst, but they sentenced her to three years exile in the Vologda administrative district. A week later, Vas in times immemorial. With that they went.
 Surprromised the abbess that the monastery would be closed. Theirit. He treated hriate to their station. . .
 For Vasilisa and the abbess three years turned into eleven. Eleven harsh years of suffering and heroism for the old abbess and of bliss for Vasilisa. Now rotector, and guardian angel. Throl, a nice little wooden town where Mother Anatolia died in the seventy-eighth year of her life.
 Several days before her death Mother Anatolrudny Lane, to Evgenia Fedorovna Nechaeva. She blessed her and ordered her not to be afraid of anything. Vasilisa did everything her mentor told her: she buried her, waited around to mark the fortieth day, and left. She took wer with the Palestinian relics.
 She found her way to Trekhprudny Lane at the end of December. Evgenia Fedorovna took her in. In the housle who still remembered old Nechaev, the builder. For the two ten-ruble pieces of gold one of those with a good memory entered one-eyed Vasilisa’s name in the house registration roster. From that time on Vasilisa lived in Evgenia Fedorovna’s household, with Elena, and later Anton Ivanovich. She served them as had become her custom from morning until night, never leaving an ounce of thought, time, or rest for herself: first Evgenia Fedorovna, then Elena, then Tanya, then everyone else she considered her benefactor. . .
 She had only one strange habear for a week, sometimes ten days. Wlanation. . .
 “Vasilisa’s got the itch for some freedom,” Pavel Alekseevich chuckled.
 It was aint the fence, and talk to her, her only close relation. All the others were cousins. . .
 12
 CLASSES AT SCHOOL ENDED, ALONG WITH THE PREMAture heat wave. Cold rain set in. They started packing for the dacha. Vasletely lost: without Vasilisa, life—not to mention their move to the dacha—was all off-kilter. Usually all the packack it all.
 Toma decially by Tanya. For her, Tanya had always been a creature of a hedestal.
 Pavel Alekseevractically did not live there, coming only on Saturdays. His admonitory quarrel with his wife, which at first had seemed to him not that significant, had grown into full-fledged emotional dissonance. Pavel Alekseevlinter in Elena’s heart. The barrent the night on the sofa on the enclosed terrace. When Pavel Alekseevstairs. Their bedroom was vacant. He also had been aternity.
 They both suffered and would have lologize for: they both felt that they were right and had been unjustly insulted. They were not accustomed to talkects of their life. Their alienation only mounted.
 On Sundays Pavel Alekseevich rose early, woke the girls, and took them down to the small river. They would splash about until lunchtime, and he taught them to swim. Then they returned home and ate dinner. Toma trlate, to use her fork, and not to gorge herself on bread. . .
 For all theackages. But without Vasilisa this festive and solemn ritual seemed to have lost its meaning. Two chance co-seated hidden hostility Elena observed the mousy little girl barely as tall as Tanya’s shoulder.
 At the very end of summer Vasened. Catchath that led to the terrace, Elena began to cry. Vasilisa too broke out into tears. She was black with suntan and thinner than usual. She explained nothing, and Elena did not ask any questions. Both of them were happy. The next day a letter came from Toma’s aunt ask the niece at least until Christmas.” Elena read the letter while Vasilisa nodded her scraggly head to the rhythm of the words. They both fell silent. Then Vasilisa made coffee—it was her only gastronomical weakness and over the course of her wanderings she had missed coffee more than anything else. Vasoured herself a big mug of watery brownish drink and was the first to resume the conversation left hanging long ago.
 “Well, we got to decide what to do with little Toma. . . She’s not a puppy or a kitten. Fenya doesn’t want her. She either goes to a children’s home or she stays here.”
 “I’m thinking.” Elena scowled. Her heart was in no way inclined toward this little girl, but she already knew that her heart was irrelevant, because the child had already attached herself to their household and nothing could be done about it.
 “I threhensible logic.
 “Vasya, what are you saying? ” Elena was shocked. “We should take her because she’s ugly? ”
 “Who else is going to take her, Elena? No ls, and barely a brain. Wlate, shoes on her feet, and clothes on her back. Look at all the clothes Tanya’s grown out of. And then she’ll be in God’s hands. . . It’s not up to us. . .”
 “Wht her,” Elena nodded doomfully.
 “So talk to hoken Pavel Alekseevich’s name, referring to him only as “he.”
 Strangely enough, Pavel Alekseevared with an answer. Apparently, he had thought about th.
 “Why, of course! Why hadn’t I thought of that? ” Elena, who icture herself in the role of mother to the unattractive little girl, beamed. Vastion.
 And Tanya was pleased. Toma had come to occupy a speclace in her life, something like a talking dog one had to take care of. She never put a morsel  out on her own to take a walk or visit neighbors. . . Toma never took offense, but tailed Tanya constantly for fear of losing her.
 Just before they left the dacha, Pavel Alekseev and received her education.
 “Okay, I agree.” The lted the invitation with dignity.
 Deep ointed. She would have liked Pavel Alekseevich to be her real father, as he was for Tanya.
 By September they returned to Moscow. Tomochka had been fully accepted into the household, and life followed its usual course. Only Elena Georginess had faded and withered. Pavel Alekseevousal relations met with no success. Parte, coming to his senses only in the morning and horrified by the events of that night.
 He trression whatsoever,“There’s nothing to discuss. I ask only that en again.”
 He saw the bouncy lock of haine to the slightly elevated base of her tailbone—os sacrum, the sacred bone. . . Why, by the way, was it sacred? —and further downward, between her talm. . .
 He winced with his entire face and moaned: it was all over, gone. Sened it. . . He drank. And smiled. That putrefied, sick uterus he had removed ten years ago had taken its revenge. The wretch.
 How oken in anger and aggravation been born in his head? What had made him say to her“You’re not a woman”? To her, the eperfection. Lost. Everything was lost. He drank another half-glass and real. From the bottom drawer of htion: PROJECT. He opened age: Stalin’s name was mentioned twice. He shuddered again.
 “How have I managed to lerson? ” Pavel Alekseevut the cruel question to himself. He pulled out the fart twice. Then ter basket. He looked through the entt—the leader’s name was not mentioned anywhere else. He yawned, shook h.
 Pavel Alekseevich never bothered his wife again. Just as he never agated to discuss this new sad state of affairs with her.
 That last nocturnal eprofound that she could no longer do anything with herself. It was as ousal intimacy grew.
 Over time the hurt neither increased nor decreased. It penetrated her to her depths, and Elena lle live for years with a birthmark or a tumor.
 Even outwardly Elena began gradually to change: she lost we corners. Her softly rounded movements, the soft angled turn of her head, her catlholstered chair or on the couch, lightly easing her body into every corner of the furniture—her natural, unique way of moving that had always attracted Pavel Alekseevich—was abandoning her.
 The clothes that had once suily recut and resewed all her light dresses for the girls—the one with the tiny flowers, the one with the small wreaths, and the one with the little bouquets—and bought herself two suits (one summer, the other winter) and turned into a school marm.
 Sitting next to his wife at family dinner one Sunday, Pavel Alekseevich sniffed the air. Through the crude aromas of Vasle cooking came something new: instead of her former flowery scent, Elena smelled of widowhood, dust, and vegetable oil. Almost like Vasilisa, only Vasilisa’s smell was mixed with either sweat or the stench of old greasy clothing. . . He moved his eyes from his wife to Tanya, and smiledto her: what a delightful little girl she was, her mother’s image, all Lenochka. . . The former Lenochka. . .
 The happy period of their marriage was over. Now all that was left was the marrle’s. After all, lots of people surviness, only mechanical habit.
 Never, ever—they both understood—would they reenter the happy waters they had sailed for ten years. . .
 TIME AND AGAIN ELENA’S GAZE WOULD STUMBLE UPON the puny larents, of her grandmother, of her husband, her own deadly illness, and even the war. Llacing her in a children’s home.
 Vasle? Nothle. . . You’re gonna have to work at it now. . . Yes, you are. . . You can’t just pray that one away. . .”
 What sins of Elena’s did she have in mind? Vas, but underlying her method was a strange, even if somewhat silly, truth.
 13
 Elena’s First Notebook
 MY LIFE IN AND OF ITSELF IS SO INSIGNIFICANT AND I myself am so insignificant that it never would have occurred to me to write anything down, were it not for the fact that my memory is getting worse and worse. It needs some sort of external reointers, references. . . So let there be at least this little notebook, and when my memory fails entirely, I will be able to look at it and remember. It’s so strange how you grow up and acquening to me and to my life. Where isit taking me, and what is it trying to tell me? I can’t understand; I don’t know how. The most horr: it’s filled with tiny cracks. My thoughts suddenly cut off, lose themselves, and  their trail. Per out. Sometarate from the name of its owner. A person you know well, have known for a long time, a loved one—suddenly you can’t remember their name, no matter how hard you try. Or just the opposerson behind it.
 I constantly write notes to myself: don’t forget this, don’t forget that. Then I lose the notes. Not too long ago I found one and had a real scare: lace.
 Deep ect that this is the beginning of some terrible disease. I just wrote that and now am entirely convinced of it. And it scares me. No one in our family had anything similar. Although Grandmother, it seems, had an older sister who reverted to her childhood when she got old. It’s awful: your whole life then becomes senseless. If a person has forgotten her own loint of living? The other day I was thinking about Grandmother Evgenia. And I couldn’t remember her patronymic. I’d totally forgotten it. It made me so upset. And then the next day it just came to me on its own: Evgenia Fedorovna.
 I have to write everything down—everything. For myself. And maybe for Tanechka. She’s goeriod of distancing herself. She’s totally preoccupied by her studies, wants to become a biologist, and has grown unusually close to her father. But they’ve always adored each other. Only he doesn’t have as good a sense of her as I do. When her head or her stomach hurts, I know exactly how it hurts. . . And the fact that Tanechka seems not to have any interest in my life and leans more toward her father doesn’t really mean anything. I am sure that she will still need me. And she needs to know everything that I know. After all, ortant. Surprortant the small, insignificant events are. Especially dreams. . . I’ve always had dreams, and such powerful ones that now my earlast and which from a dream. Tanechka needs to learn about all my petty trifles while they still haven’t been lost by my faulty memory. For example,  against a green velvet sofa. It tickles. Kitty-corner in front of me is a white tile stove, a Dutch stove, and I want to touch it. It is smooth and alluring. I collect my strength. It’s very scary. I’m afraid to walk without anyone’s hand, but it seems to me that I could run over to it. I screw up my face wush off from the sofa, and run. Fly almost. And run palms first right into the tile. It ectedly hot. I scream. A large, mustached woman w into her arms. . . Where was that? Probably artment. Mother said that I started to walk very early, before my first birthday. Can a child that age really remember anything? Or was it a dream after all? There’s no one to ask.
 My father, Georgy Ivanovher, from a young age an ardent revolutionary who even hung out with terrorists, but after the events of 1905 he turned to Tolstoyism. After he became a Tolstoyan he professed other ideals, and working the land became his religion. After that he never agaarevo.
 When he was young, Father was very handsome. He had an aquiline nose and bright black eyes. Probably that was his Greek or South Caucasian blood. Mother, on the other hand, does not look very pretty otato nose. When she was older, though, when I already began to understand threttier. She lost a lot of weight, her face acquired more distinct characteristics, became more memorable. Father was a man of unlassions. He lered, but incredibly kind. No, not kind, selfless. He was truly a man of the future, as I understand it. He had something in common with PA. He never thought about his own benefit, in fact, he didn’t really understand what that might be. He was ready to give everything away. But except for his books he had nothing, and his library was always communal. Hlate had a curlicue border with the words “From the Public Library of Georgy Miakotin.”
 He professed nonvassionately and energetically as everything else. Now I’m able to judge hot at home. He was gifted with the rare ability to instill his ideas in others; there was something infectious about him. Like Tolstoy he had many acolytes and followers. I thersonality. She followed him everywhere, trusted him in everything. He would change h with him. For her everyth her life as a modest music teacher in the city for life in the countryside. In the countrysle, did laundry, and milked cows. She learned to do it all. All of a’s behalf: in addition to everything else, she wanted to be his best student. She did everything he wanted. Except for one tharents’ house in Moscow to give birth. And left her tiny children with them to raise until we were old enough. I was the last, the third. Father was very angry with her for doing this. Because the other Tolstoyans all raised their children on the land. But this was the only issue that Mama did not concede to Father. Until I was four I was raised by my grandmother, then, at my father’s insistence, taken to live with them in the commune.
 After collectivization started, the authorities launched frightening attacks against the commune, although, you would think, it was that same ideal collective farm the Bolsheviks intended to organize throughout the entire country. In the f organize collective farms. But he refused.
 “Our communarty bosses.
 At first they left the members of the commune alone, but clearly not for long. Followital. They began the their first log houses in the foothills of Altai. Just before they moved, Mama begged Papa to leave me in Moscow. I was ft me. I became a Nechaeva. Probably that’s what saved me from arrest—my grandmother’s surname.
 In Altai, in Solonakcha, their life took a horrible turn. After that I never saw any of them. My brother Sergei was drafted, but refused on ethical grounds: he did not want to carry a gun. He was tried by military tribunal and sentenced to death by firing squad. He was like my father: unbending. But Vasya was a gentle, tender lherd boy. He was the only one of us who truly loved the soil and farming not abstractly, out of theoretical considerations, but from the heart. Animals listened to him.
 My. Vasya drowned in the Ob River five days after he was handed a draft notice. The next day he was supposed to appear at the draft board in town. That was 1934. Soon after, my parents were arrested. They were given ten years without the right to send or receive letters. Grandmother tried to track them down: before the war she stood in all sorts of lines. But she never got an answer. She serished because of my father. Basically, that’s how all the Tolstoyans became extinct. I visited Maroseyka Street where there used to be a vegetarian cafeteria. But the place was unrecognizable. No publishing house, no cafeteria. . .
 But I wanted to write about something else. Here’s another berries in front of me. The berries are almost the size of eggs. I pull the fat wh and toss the berries into a bucket, as if theywere no good, trash. It’s the inedible white centers that are valuable. The smell of the raspberries is so strong that it seems as if the air itself is colored with a reddish-blue tint. Insortant to some can be trash and garbage for others. Was this a dream?
 There are lots more just like this. I’m carryed greens for tiny baby rabbits. The stronger of them jump up first, while several little scrawny ones can’t make their way to the food. I have to sort these weak ones out and put them arate cage. So the stronger ones wouldn’t trample them. That seems not tohave been a dream. But maybe it was a dream? It’s difficult to imagine that such tender liberties were allowed at our commune. Life was very harsh. . .
 All these colorful trifles somewhat confuse and, if you will, soften the images of my memories. The commune where I larevo, a not so distant suburb of Moscow, was small: only eighteen to twenty adults and about ten children, all different ages. But we had our own school. We were taught to read usrimer. And our first books were, of course, Tolstoy’s. The story of the plum pits: how it’s bad to lie. About the wooden trough for the old grandfather: how one should treat one’s parents well. There was almost never enough food, but it was divided equally. When there was a lot—that happened too—it was still shameful to take a lot.
 The Teachings of Christ Presented for Children: I have memories of it from early childhood. I read the real Gospels only much later, when I was living with Grandmother. . . To say that the adults in the commune loved Tolstoy would be an understatement: they idolized him. As a small child I had my fill of him. It’s even funny to admhy that I wouldn’t go nearThe Cossacks, Anna Karenina, or evenWar and Peace. I read his novels only after the war.
 But that’s not what I want to talk about. There’s something else. Since I was a little girl from time to time I’ve had moments when I seem to lose touch with the here and now. I therience with others. I have notty, fogged over, and then a second later is once again rolling a truck or dressing a doll. The chs out for a while. I’m sure that everyone knows the feelassage of time. How can I descrecially since I’m not a writer? Yet for some reason ortant to try to get all this out. Perhaps ed trusting my own memory, which constantly fails me.
 The most frossible to describe—is that of border crossings. I’m talking about the border between everyday life and various other conditions I’m acquainted with but that are as difficult to describe as death. What can a person who has never died say about dying? But  out of everyday life you die a little bit. I love my professrecisely because it has an exact set of rules that can be used to organize everything. There’s a key to the transrojection to another. What I’m talking about, though, iswhen there’s a transition, but from one time to the next you never know what laws govern it, which is what makes it so frightening.
 Merciful Lord, all those journeys. . . All of them different. . . The most frened just after my grandfather’s death. In order for you to understand this, I need to say a bit more about my family.
 Everyone feared my grandfather—my mother and my grandmother included. That I was afraerfectly understandable. I was a frightened little girl in general. When he died, I was seven years old. In 1922. He was a buart of it. All that survutated. There was a court trial, and that was his ruin. After the court case Grandfather never recovered. Usually he would secially when it was sunny. Grandmother and Grandfather lrudny Lane, in the Volotsky buildings. My grandfather himself had built them, in 1911, I think. It was a garret apartment. The elevator never worked. Cl the tall staircase took a long time. Grandfather basically never left the house. He was always artment with two canes. He never used a crutch. He just kept it near the couch.
 In those years we—I mean the commune—kept cows and brought mital No. 1 on the Kaluga Highway. We had a cart and a communal horse. Mama sometimes took me with her, and after having delivered the milk, we would ride from the Kaluga Highway to the vegetarian cafeteria on Maroseyka Street. I remember carrot tea with saccharine, and soy cutlets. . . In the same buublishing house and the Tolstoy Society’s offices. My father’s relat with the society’s administration was not very good. It seems strange, but as far as I can judge now, the Tolstoyans were always frove something to each other. My father was an ardent debater. Between holitical reasons. As for my grandmother, Evgenractice her faith correctly, the Tolstoyan way. . . Lhenomena; for him the main thing was moral content. And Chritome of morality. I look back on thtion of morality. She says, “that’s God’s way” or “that’s not God’s way,” and hasn’t a thought about good and evil, and judges only by her silly heart. Wha had a theory for everything.
 My mother varents almost secretively. In any case, I somehow realrudny. It was kind of Mama’s and my secret. Larents. Dation. Only the sick and little children were given milk.
 Grandmother always received us in the kitchen, which was right next to the entrance. Grandfather never came out of the room at the far end of the apartment, and I dt our visits secret from him. He extended hrudny. A very, very cruel and erson Grandfather was. He barely tolerated his grandchildren.
 Mama told me that he had a long and paheming. They did not take me to his funeral: it was freezing cold. After some tox. Wht in the room where Grandfather had lived. They put me on his couch, which stood rather strangely in the center of the room. Probably roach him from both sides. He was very heavy, and it was very difficult for Grandmother to change his linen by herself. . .
 I was very ill for about three days, and then the healing sores just itched. Grandmother gave me some sort of tranqu, so that I confused day and night. Once in the middle of the night I heard a knock that seemed to come from the neighbors’. I was surpr. What were they pounding nails at night for? Harder and harder. Each strike hit me right on the bridge of my nose. That’s because I’m sleeplained to myself. I have to wake up. But I couldn’t. Then the blows seemed to coalesce, as ressure into my forehead. . . The drinning abyss. This was no dream; it was something else. And hysical, but some other kind. Second, the spinning blackness began in the middle of my forehead, formed a funnel, and carried me off beyond time. I was terr myself. . . Pain encircled me from all sides; it was bigger than me; it existed before me. I was sening, I guessed, was what is called eternity. . .
 All these explanations come to me now. Then, as a little girl, I could never have found the words. But since then, whenever I recollect this event, a vibrating nausea arises just beneath my heart.
 But then the dred. I was lyer, with the darling little bay window, was not there. Thlace that resembled nothing else. It was a low-ceeared into the gloominess. Perhaps ace with what resembled a wretched sky overhead. There were a lot of unpleasant things there, but after all these years I don’t want to strain my memory to resurrect the details, because when I think back to then I begin to feel sick.
 A multace around me. Among them was Grandfather. They moved about paaying no attention to me. I didn’t want them to see me. Especially Grandfather. He led, as he had when he was alive, but he had no cane.
 Thowerlessness and sadness was so heavy, so contrary to life, that I guessed that this was death. As soon as I thought that, I saw myself behatches of sun and shadow. A large poplar toppled by a recent tornado lay across the path, and I walked along  trunk, and inhaling the strong scent of withering foliage. Everythongy: the tree trunk under my slight weight and the layers of decaying foliage. A dream inverted: from there to here.
 Here, lace where I was, there was no real light and no shadows. There, behots of light, and an immeasurable wealth of shades of colors. Here everything was unfixed and brown, but real. There everything was unreal. Here there were no shadows. Darkness doesn’t have shadows. Shadows are possible only where there is light. . .
 I lay as s. I wanted to cross myself, as Grandmother had taught me, but I was sure that I could not even lift my hand. But my arm lifted easily, and I made the sign of the cross and recited“Our Father”. . .
 A man roached me. Through the clay eye slits in his mask he stared at me with bright blue eyes. These eyes were the only thing that had any color. The man sneered.
 My prayer hung tangibly over my head. Not that it was weak. It just did not go anywhere. It was cancelled. Thrayer without light is like fish without water—dead. . .
 I could hear the buzz of a conversatrived of any sense. Nothing but lethargic irritation, a languid argument about nothing. And Grandfather’s voice: I ORDERED, you ORDERED, I did not ORDER. . . This “ORDERED” was a being. . .
 The one eak. I don’t remember what he said. But I remember that hectedly coarse and vulgar, ungrammatical; he chided me, even mocked me. His words, like the brownish clay on his face, also were a mask.
 “He can speak using other words; he’s deceiving me. Liar,” I thought. And as soon as I saeared. It seems I had exposed him with my thought alone. . .
 SHADOWS FLUTTERED HERE AND THERE, AND ALL OF thlace was enormous, infinite; it filled everything, and nothing existed besides it. It was a maze with no way out. I became terrified. Not for myself, but for Grandfather, and I began to shout.
 “Grandfather! ”
 He seemed to look in my direction, but either he didn’t recognize me, or didn’t want to recognize me, but just continued mumbling, looking at me with his faded brown eyes: I ORDERED, he ORDERED. . .
 Suddenly everyth away. Lredawn gloom.
 I had not awoken, I s. The mornromise, because even the nighttime gloom of this, our world, is a shade of our earthly light. What had been shown to me there was the absence of llace. That was it, the shadow of death. . . And when the last edge of the darkness floated out of the room and deared somewhere to the north, I heard a clear, youthful, indubitably male voice saying:
 “The middle world.”
 TO THIS DAY I HAVE NO IDEA WHAT THAT WAS. . . OF ONLY one thed among the crowd of shadows.
 Later, when I grew up and read the Gospels and the Epreserve forever their lameness and gloominess, and that what’s behind all this is sin? I do not condemn Grandfather, by no means—who in our family can judge whom? But Mama once let slse and the workers to die. . . Theft or bribery. . . The usual Russian story. And so, is it going to be this way forever, with no forgiveness whatsoever? Dromise deliverance from sin only for those without sin? No, I don’t understand. . .
 And what about my memory lapses? What if I forget? I forget so much these days, I probably also forget my sins. So then what’s the poentance and forgiveness? If there’s no guilt, then there can be no forgiveness.
 Tieces of my life seem to have been washed away as if by water. In theortant stays in the dream. You get this horrible feeling that there are valuables stored in some sealed room that youcan’t get into. Although someterson you were having the conversation with, and continue the conversation where it broke off. And he answers, and everything is clear as day. But then you wake up and once again, there’s just blankness.
 I had one of those blank spots appear where I committed a betrayal. I still remember it, but just the fact. For a long tentance or shame. Apparently, I forgave myself. And the way I commangs of anything, not even hesitation, or thought. I am talking about my dead Anton. There was a poem that was very popular during the war, Konstantin Simonov’s “Wait for me, and I’ll return”. . . At the end it goes: “Only you and I will know how among flames and fire your waiting saved my life. . .” Instead I caused his death by not waiting.
 I fell in love with PA not even at first sight, but as if I had loved him even before I was born and merely remembered anew my old love for him. I forgot Anton as if he were just a neighbor, or a classmate, or a colleague from work. Not even a relative. Though I’d lived with him for five years. He’s the father of my only daughter. Your father, Tanechka. I see nothing of Anton or his family in you. You really do resemble PA. Your forehead, your mouth, your hands. I won’t even mentressions, your gestures, and your habits. But I can’t tell you that PA is not your natural father. So, rived him of his daughter. Can you ever forgive me?
 Overall, I’m certain that PA means more for Tanya than I do. He’s meant more for me than I have for myself. Even now when everytherson. And no one erson has for so many years served the greatest evil there is on this earth. How can these two therson? In my heart I sensed it all, knew it all back then when we were in evacuation and he took the Romashkins’ kittens away. At first I couldn’t believe that he had drowned them. Now I believe everything. After all, winess. Destroyed everything. Destroyed me. Cruelty? I don’t understand. But that’s exactly what I don’t want to remember now. For me rlayed such a large role. My dreams and early memories.
 What I see—what’s told to me and shown to me er. I have a wonderful spatrofessional in a certain sense. Probably I am partarent.
 The dreams I see exendency. There is doubtless logic to the transition, only it remains on the other side and never emerges into waking reality. It’s perfectly clear to me that even though my hyperphysen in a school notebook Tanya started and abandoned at the very beginning because the school year had ended. No less real than the houses, streets, trees, and teacups here.
 But again, the key to it all is sealed in a room, in a room without doors. In general, a lot of different things in my dreams are connected with doors and windows. The fortant, door I saw was a very long time ago, not as a child, but when I was a teenager. I can’t say for sure when, because thanied by a sense of having encountered something already seen before. As ossible first to commit something to memory and then to be born into the world with the memory.
 This door was in a cliff, but at first I saw the cliff, which was of dazzling fresh limestone so totally and abundantly flooded with sunlight that all the details of its coarse texture, all its uneven surface—a memorial incarnate to a hardworking civilization of small shelled animals long ago extinct—were as visible as if under a magnifying glass. Then my gaze sht over the surface, and I saw a door with a bas-relief surface cut into the side of the cliff. The rel to an intelligible image. The smooth lted, and then the meaning of the image revealed itself to me. I made out a h, delicate hands folded in meekness, Jewish heads with tall brows bent low, and, above them all, the lone figure of the Son with the Theotokos as child in his arms. . .
 The door was ready to open; a shadow even seemed to flerture in the cliff, and I was invited to enter. But I took freared entirely.
 I was not ready to enter. But there was nothing irreversible or irrevocably lost in this. I sly wasn’t ready. I’m still not ready.
 Then it was as if I were told: Leave. Let your fear expend itself in life’s travails. And when your pain, your longing, and your thirst for understanding exceed your fear, come back again.
 That’s approximately what I heard at the door. It was said tenderly. By the way, people always speak tenderly to me.
 There was another thing about the door. It led from one space to another. But there weren’t any walls or anythaces. Just a door. Not even a door, a doorway. But everythle inhabiting it. I desperately wanted to go ace of the doorway was hostile and would not let me through. Its hostility was so great that it wasn’t worth trying. I stepped away. And then t. . . I turned around. But the doorway was no longer there. And the space wasn’t there. Only rortunity.
 I also remember how Grandmother died. As happens with the righteous, she knew in advance of the day of her death. Not long before Grandmother’s death Vasens with her. But on the eve of Grandmother’s death she returned. By that time Grandmother had not got out of bed for a week, had not taken any food, and had drunk only small amountsof water. She was not ain, at least, so it seemed to me. Her whole llain. She deak, answering questions only by shaking her head to say no. No to everything. Vasilisa sat alongside Grandmother and read something devout. I think now that it must have been the “Office of the Parting of the Soul from the Body.” But maybe something else. Grandmother was well over etian mummy. Despite her horrifying thinness, though, she was very beautiful. Those last days she den her eyes. But her face was not unconscious. Just the opposortant and weighty question.
 On the eve of her death her young need by to borrow wineglasses: it was her birthday. I opened the cupboard and took out several dattern. The neighbor started looking it over and began to gush. She spoke rather loudly, and her squeals of delriate: Grandmother lay dying in the same room.
 “My, they knew how to make things then. They don’t make things that way now. It must cost. . .”
 And just then, ronouncement.
 “My child, you’re disturbing me. . .”
 FOR TWO WEEKS SHE HAD SAID NOTHING, AND THE LAST three days it had seemed to us that she was unconscious. . . I don’t know how we dortant business we tore her from. . .
 A day later, at sunset, when we—Anton Ivanovich, Vasilisa, and I—were sitting at the table, her clear, loud voice suddenly rang out from its weeklong oblivion.
 “The doors! The doors! ”
 Vasen the front door. She swen. Just then a stream of aast. . .
 I turned toward Grandmother. She exhaled, and never inhaled again. The draft seemed to dart back. The front door slammed shut of its own, and the window leaf jerked on its hinge. A sunbeam darted from Grandmother’s face to the shifting glass. The sunbeam, a lane we heard the faint sound of shattering glass.
 Anton Ivanovich stared at the window leaf and shook his head. Vasilisa, who had sensed everything instantly, crossed herself. I went over to Grandmother, not yet quite believing that everything was over.
 Her death had been as serene as it could be. It was“a Chrainless, and without shame.” But at the time I didn’t know that’s what it was called. Vasilisa knew.
 Grandmother’s face turned solemn and joyous. The pale-porcelain clay, and her wrinkles smoothed out. Her eyebrows were sable, with tiny brushes at the bridge of her nose. It was precisely at that moment that I distinctly realized how much I resembled her. . . Our whed to the floor.
 Anton went to see what had happened to the window leaf. He still hadn’t realized that Grandmother had died.
 “The draft shattered the glass,” he mused utty. “There’s a biece of it for the window leaf. . . Good thanes could be real trouble. . .”
 The wed. The house was in the moderne style, built by Grandfather in better times. . .
 Windows and doors. . . Windows and doors. . . Even a child knows the difference. A door is a boundary. Behace. You enter it, and you yourself change. It’s ossible not to change. While a window merely lends its knowledge for a time. You look, and then you forget. But that’s already concerning my dreams.
 That day, the day of Grandmother’s death, Vasilisa’s hour arrived. She knew everything about death. How it’s done. How to bathe, dress, and mourn the dead. What clothes to dress them rayers to read, what to eat and what not to eat. I submletely, without the least hesitation. And not only I, but Anton too. She took everything in stride, issued instructions, and we did as we were told.
 By eveneck coins. Where had Vas? Had she brought them with her?
 An  burned at the head of the table, and Vasilisa read slowly in Church Slavonic before the icon. I sat on a stool next to the table, saying farewell to Grandmother. I was twenty-four years old. Nearents’ deaths only many years later: at that time we still didn’t know what “ten years without the right to send or receive letters” really meant. . .
 It was the first death I ever witnessed. I can’t say that I was frightened. I stood  in the earth. Everythossible to remove this cold object. The whair of new shoes with blunt toes and metal-lined holes for laces in order to journey the easy roads that lay beyond the grave .. .
 Anton Ivanovartment. Everyone was under observation and frightened. Pursarture of her benefactress. Anton Ivanovlant and a blemished family history.
 The old man who showed up looked like an ordinary beggar. But when he took hriest. Wiece of embroidered fabric on the desk, which Vasilisa had washed clean. It was the antieces of relics: on it he consecrated the Eucharist. That was the first liturgy in my life. We had never been taken to church: that had been Father’s condition when he had allowed the children to live at Grandmother’s. The versect of religion, recognizing neither church, nor the Theotokos, nor icons, nor saints. . . This time I really wanted to take communion, but wasn’t able to say so. The prerformed burial rites. After the secret prayer servtibly into the night. I never saw him again.
 The n and went into the kitchen. I don’t know why. Maybe to get something to drink. There lace sat Grandmother in her blue dressy dress with starched lace collar. On the table in front of her there stood a tea glass in a metal holder. She was drinking tea. Everything looked so usual that I began to wonderwhether I had dreamed that she had died.
 “Tea? ” she offered. I nodded. The teakettle was hot. The teapot had a fresh brew in it that was unusually fragrant. I poured myself some tea and sat down next to Grandmother.
 “So you didn’t die, did you? ” I asked.
 She smiled, and her white, even teeth gleamed. She has new false teeth, I thought, but said nothing so as not to embarrass her.
 “Die? There is no death, Lenochka. There is no death. You’ll soon learn this.”
 I finished my tea. We were silent, and it felt good.
 “Go to sleep,” she said, and I went without asking about anything.
 I lay down.
 And fell asleep immediately. What had that been? A dream? Not a dream? Neither a dream nor not a dream. A third something. I don’t know what to call it. A third state equidistant from the dream world and the waking world. . .
 Now, after all these years, I suspect that reserved in my memory. What was preserved for the rest of my life was just my firm knowledge that when you are inside a dream, all of your usual world turns into a dream. Waking reality and dreams: they’re like the front and back sides of the same cloth. And what about that third state? Is  view in mechanical drawing?
 Over terience, I have learned how to distinguish one from the other almost infallibly. In the usual daytrived of mystery and their real content. Although expensots, still when a thing becomes truly unusable, it gets thrown out.
 In dreams, th might not always hold water—as if it still hasn’t been trained to. Thear. They are abstract unt? ” And then the pears. In and of themselves thendent existence. That’s what I’ve figured out.
 But the third realm is something else entirely. Precisely the way things behave makes it easiest to distinguish a real dream from what I call the third realm. For example, the tea glass Grandmother Evgenia Fedorovna was holding was not a glass at all. It was an identity, like Grandmother herself. Possibly, it had its own name, unknown to me. It was large, of a particular size in order to fit an unusually large tea-glass holder, and both of them were custom-made. The tea-glass holder, it seems, is a distinctively Russian object. Nowhere do they drink tea the way they do in Moscow. But threntice at the Fabergé factory where the tea-glass holder had been crafted. An ostentattion: “TO DEAR VASILY TIMOFEEVICH. . .”
 Grandmother had smtion had been missing. Where could osed by his colleagues: “Timofeich, time for tea! Some like honey, some like jam, but Vasya is a cookie man! ”
 . . . On closer examination the tea-glass holder turned out to be more elegant than the original, which has survived to this day. There s that Grandmother Evgenia Fedorovna had drunk all her life, even when she had lived in her rich father’s house. . . She didn’t like strong tea. . .
 Approxerfection. As if an invisible craftsman had worked on them in order to return to them their dignity and true character. In any case, that’s what could be salete confidence about Grandmother’s formerly dressy dress. The next mornots. I swear: at night the dress had been new, and the collar solemnly stiff. . .
 And the teapot in the kitchen was still warm. . .
 The next tring of 1941. You, Tanechka, were two months old; you were a weak, cranky child, and both Vasilisa and I were exhausted. That n. I was awakened by the smell of tea, the same tea—I recognized it immediately. I went into the kitchen. Grandmother was sitting at the table. The teapot was hot, and the silver tea-glass holder stood on the table in front of her, but she was not drinking tea and did not offer me any. She was dressed strangely: atches, and buttonholes edged with new fabric. As soon as I walked : she had a big bundle in her arms. She opened  and shook her head.
 “No, it’s too big.”
 And the big bundle immediately became smaller. The bundle’s metamorphososed to be. Grandmother began to gather kitchenware in the contracted bag, meticulously examining each object. Three spoons, three cups, three plates. A small pot, a fryorridge. Then she added salt and dry cereal to it.
 Her demeanor was stern and sad. Then she took the tea-glass holder, pulled out the glass, and poured the tea into the sink. Fresh, strong-brewed, fragrant tea. Then she unbuttoned her overcoat, unfastened from the collar a small golden brooch ut them in the bundle as well. It seemed as if she wanted to say something to me. But she dointed to the stuffed little bundle.
 I told Vasilisa about it. Vas and down.
 “Oh, Elena, they’re coming for us. They’re coming for us. . .”
 But they didn’t come for us. I remembered all thlant began. The little bundle, and the brooch. Vasared. She knew what the vital necessities were. The only thear to me and not to Vasilisa. Vaslausible life.
 Anton was certain that he would not be called to the front. He was an engractically all engineers had deferrals. But owlant. It’s possersonality. He never was friends with anyone, never trusted anyone. To be honest, I see absolutely nothing in common between the two of you. . .
 We derly. There was terrelessly confused. On top of all that, you were oint. I would go out to nurse you, but I dear entirely.
 And so, preoccupened.
 Havsed alongside you. It was very hot. Our apartment was directly under the roof, and in the summer it was intolerable there. So it was hot in reality, and I also dreamed that it was hot.
 Whether letely unrecognizable. The soil was reddish and dry, dusty, and filled with stones. Strange plants grew—resembling cactuses, but as huge as trees. The thorns on them were sharp and retractable, as if made of blue iron. The trees breathed through these thorns, and they would extend out and then fold back. Up ahead, Anton Ivanovrickly trees, not looking back. He wore a military uniform, but the uniform was old-fashioned: tight-fitting leggings, a short jacket, and Anton Ivanovich himself thin and with the build of a young boy. If you two have anythe. The narrowness ward stretch of neck and chin. Yes, that’s it. It had never occurred to me before.
 So, there he was, walk and wait for me. Especossible. . . The dt increasing, although I waswalking fast and he was walking very slowly. But I couldn’t shout. I don’t know why; all I know ossible, forbidden. He kept moving farther and farther away, and at the last minute I saw him not on foot, but on horseback. He galloped queared entirely. At that polants on windowsills, and the soil was no longer red, but ordinary, with grass that was ordinary but very soft and tender. . .
 Vasretations of dreams, but that time she said little.
 “Each of us travels the preordained. . .”
 BUT I KNEW THAT WITHOUT HER. OF COURSE, THE FIRST therish at the front. But why that black uniform, those cactuses, those thorns. . . Why was it forbidden to shout? The maoint is buried. But the most surprising thing is that ultimately it will all become clear. I am absolutely sure that notherfluous. . .
 But still, lots and lots of things are unclear. For example, ted to this. Even our language and its grammar. At the same tresent is one and the same. And moments like that occur not all that infrequently. And they leave very strong ressions. And when you remember them, it’s as if they were restored, but in some sort of new grammatical category that doesn’t exist in our language. . . So lain. I can’t explain. . .
 Many thlain. For example, back eration, and it wasn’t clear whether I was alive or not, my consciousness just sort of floated somewhere, in some mist, but not in water. Then someone pulled me out of eared. And ast, and that I had always been acquainted with this man with the round forehead and wide-set eyes. Both ast and in the future. But he hresent. And even now, as I remember back, I sense myself resent more strongly than ever before. Because PA possesses a specresent.
 But what varresent! A lot sloor student forced to learn everything by rote, without forgetting anything, to the very last letter. Of late, I often feel frortant things. And so I’m writing things down, convulsively, understanding well that I’ll forget all the same, but the main thing is that what I write down is only a shadow of what I see and feel. . .
 Another experience—or vision? —I had also relates to that realm of the most resent. To what I tentatively call the third realm. “The Great Waters”—I’ll call it that because this condition or event—they’re hardly distinguishable—has to be designated with words of some kind. . . In any event PA wasn’t around then; ened before him. . . Baslaces, including the Great Waters. . . But my “I” was somewhat ded. And blind, it seems. Because no preserved in my memory. There was nothassing or flowing—and I sensed myself to be more moisture than a hard body. But moiece of undissolved starch in waterykissel or a jellyfish in the foam along the shoreline. The wealth of  below, in the middle. . . Impressarticularly sweet—from which I couldn’t tear myself away, and they seemed to suck in my entire being and lead me off somewhere. I also experienced various kinds of motion, like swimming, but more chaotic and requiring great effort, and while moving I encountered various streams that washed over me sometimes tenderly, and sometimes vigorously, like a massage. They stroked me, made me ticklish, tenderly sucking me in, then letting me go. . .
 The main thing was the satisfaction. Of hunger, thirst, the need to be touched, and of the mutual interaction of liquids. Probably tharticular being. It was a caressartial dissolution of me in another, and another in me. . .
 A blissful state. But long, rare threads of pa into this bliss and induce me to move, and the new movement led to new bliss. . .
 That’s roximately. . .
 Then something new and horrible set in. Were it not so absolutely dark, you might say that Gloom had set in. It was greater than any form of conscenetrating, like water or air, and uncontrollable, like the elements. And at the core of my tenuous body my little“I” writhed with the anguish of fear.
 It was not a human pain, which has its dimensions—beginning, end, rise, fall. The anguerienced had no dimensions. It was absolute, loint. Aimed entirely at me. I experlace once inhabited by my dead grandfather.
 I felt a particular kind of nausea. But asms. My lexly organized body yearned to contract, to leave, and to hide from the moist horror that like an ocean covered the surfaces of all bodies. . . My body seemed to know that the horror was penetrating it through and through and not just flowing over its surface. . .
 These two desushed inward. At the moment when sed, and almost ceased to be. . .
 Although the spasms and cramps rent me apart, there was a shade of pleasure ain.
 A sled shell, and began to suck me in, intensifying the gloom—which had seemed to have reached its limits—by yet another degree. At that poed and shifted, and I turned myself inside out and immediately realized that the whole world was turning inside out together with me. . .
 It was agonizing, but reassuring. I was partation. . . it would just take longer and be more difficult. Lart of myself. I felt it working. My strength was ebberienced before: I had to hurry. In this new and not yet entirely evolved incarnation, a new dimension—that of time—was already ticking, already marking out invisible boundaries. I tred with a deafening ring. I turned myself outward. I had pulled myself out.
 Blain. Untain, I was unable to imagine bliss. There was no more horror and no more pain (a variation of horror). The whole world had become different; I had become different. Only a small part of my“I” remaearing.
 The great novelty was that my body, accustomed to locaterienced a weak current, a light sensation of movement along its newly constituted surface. Probably my body, accustomed to der. Not moisture, not water, but air filled my inner body. It expanded slightly, then fell again. My breathing engaged. But I had not even succeeded , and I saw Light. Had my“I” acquired vision? Or had somethened before? I don’t know. Light had formed. And Eyes had formed. And I closed them, because at the pain. . .
 For whom and for what am I writing thisDiary of a Madman? Who will believe me if I don’t entirely believe myself? Will you read all this to the end? Will anyone read this at all? And why? Perhaps you shouldn’t bother. . . I’m talking to you, Tanechka, but at times I forget and write whatever comes into my head so that it won’t dissolve into nothing.
 Yesterday I came home from work, and Vasilisa said,“Someone called for you. . .” Ferson she said had called. I asked her again. Once again Vasilisa said who. But this morning I again couldn’t remember. What’s more, hone, but I can’t remember with whom. . . It’s a strange kind of absentmindedness, a total lack of attention. I do what I can so that no one notices. It seems to me that thlays itself least at work. There I don’t forget anyth. Except I couldn’t remember the name of the new draftswoman. I had to wrencil jar. “Valeria.” To tell the truth I committed it to memory right away. There, now I finally remember who called yesterday: it was Valya, Ilya Goldberg’s wife. She called from a phone booth, said something I couldn’t quite understand. She asked that PA get involved in something. And I forgot to give him the message. . .
 It seems that PA has noticed that something’s wrong with me. Sometimes I catch his “medical” gaze on me. Sletely. He trlain himself to me several times, and I see that he’s suffering because of our falling-out, but there’s nothing I can do with myself. The words he spoke that night still stand between us, and I don’t know whether I could ever forget them. “You are not a woman. You don’t have that organ.” It’s true. But why is that so offensive?
 Things at home are very bad. For everyone. The only one who feels great is our little foster child. She sprinkles sugar on buttered white bread. And eats a loaf of white bread a day. Wy, self-forgetful look on her face. At the same time, though, she’s always looking askance, as if she were guilty or had stolen something. She’s gained weight. Tanechka has helped her catch up with her schoolwork. In the end ly mind-boggling: I lost PA because of her.
 Tanechka, why am I writing about this to you? You’re only twelve years old. But one day you’ll grow up and fall in love with someone, and then you’ll forgive me all this nonsense.
 He drinks a lot. He always smells of vodka—either just consumed or the reek of yesterday’s. He’s very gloomy, but I am certain that it’s not just because of me.
 For Old New Year’s—Vasotato salad with bologna sausage. She boic. The house reeked all day from it. Her eternal fastorarily. In the evener in front of me. One of the articles was circled—about doctor-murderers. I looked at the list: half of them were his friends. The majority—Jews. He poured a glass of vodka, and chased ie. Then he wetted Toma on thehead—she beamed—and returned to his study. . . I really wanted to talk to hossible.
 I went to bed and before fallen to all of us? But nothing was shown to me.
 14
 ON JANUARY 13 OF THE NEW 1953, PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH went on another drinking binge. But this time there was no cheerful revelry, and no dacha. He was morose, shone. He went to the clinic no more often than three times a week, and by two in the afternoon he was already home. Tanechka, wany of Toma.
 Both Pavel Alekseever in his ear one of her baby nicknames for him.
 Two other chartment, Ilya Iosifovich Goldberg’s sons, Gennady and Vitaly—thin, awkward, with breaking voices and violent acne. They came almost every day to eat dinner. Elena rison since 1949, and Valya, who had worked in the laboratory of a Jewish doctor just arrested, was fired the day after. Left wackage to her husband. She herself never ceased to be amazed that she was so sickly. . .
 Vasatties. Elena guessed the reason for Vasilisa’s discontent, but said nothing. . .
 Throughout the entiration. Anyone weak out and revile the criminals. Pavel Alekseevich realized from the outset that all doctors down to the very last one were being corralled into collaborating in these shameful accusations. He had not the least doubt that the doctors were completely innocent. Pavel Alekseevlated suicide. The threserving both honor and dignity. Pavel Alekseevich tried this seductive thought out on himself.
 The holes ressed him. His beloved daughter was too small to become his confidante. Thehthalmologist Petya Krivoshey. . . All except Sasha Maklakov, hired Jew-hunters. . .
 But the bower, for the first time in her life had taken its bait: the idea of covert enemies, clever doctors, and Jewish sorcerers struck a chord in her medieval soul. All the picture fit: the Jews had led the revolution, killed the tsar, and destroyed the church. What could you expect from the people who had crucified Christ?
 Vasrayed. From the street and from latients of Russian descent with cancer. An enormous number of eyewitnesses and victims emerged. People refused treatment from Jewoisoning and the evil eye set in. . . Staff reducturges, trial by rumor. . . Lydosing an underground ring. . .
 Durartner, or, rather, listener. Elena went off to work, and the girls—to school. Followot of coffee. He dlete inability to maintain, a conversation. Wh of tea or something stronger and embark on an unrushed lecture. . .
 In fact, the lecture was ulous, but there was no other: he could not lecture students on his investigations—having nothing to do with questions of medicine—into the history of antisemitism and its religious and economic roots. Mommsen served as hhus Flavius and real authors from antiquity; he read Saint Augustine and some of the Church Fathers. . . He worked himself toward the Middle Ages. . . Antlagued all of Christian civilization.
 Vased cabbage. You couldn’t say that she did not hear Pavel Alekseevich, but for her his brilliant lectures were written in a foreign language. She was able to extract only the general osite—he even condemned those who attacked the Jews. As he got more and more worked up, Pavel Alekseevoor Vasilisa even more. Maybe he’s a Jew? Untower to legalize infanticide, she did not know how she should feel about him. How much had he given away without ever counting? How many people had he helped without even knowing their name? And he was cutting children out of their mothers’ bellies, killing little babies. . . Maybe he’s the Anti-Christ? She seemed not to droving silence.
 Once, having consumed a bottle of vodka over the course of a two-hour monologue, Pavel Alekseevich noticed that Vasilisa had not touched the coffee he himself had made for her.
 “Vasilisa, sweetie, why didn’t you drink your coffee? Don’t tell me you’re afraoisoned? ” he joked.
 “So what if I am? ” Vasilisa muttered.
 Pavel Alekseevich wanted to laugh, but stifled his laughter. As happens with alcoholics, his mood suddenly changed. He was overwhelmed by repulsion for his life. He became morose and slumped.
 “A great nation, damn it. . .”
 Vasect list.
 15
 THE STALIN ERA ENDED ON MARCH 5, BUT A LONG TIME passed before anyone figured that out. Early in the morning that day the leader’s death was announced over the radio. By thosed to steer the Soviet Union were so discombobulated that they decided first to inform the world that he was ill. These fallacse’s health communicated more than just the gradual decline of his already nonexistent wellness. Medroduced a certain quantity of urine. Even if it was of the very best quality, it was still urine! That was the fersonality. The new leaders also needed time to get accustomed to the idea that ultimately even the most immortal die.
 The country’s populatsed from shock-induced heart attacks. Others sighed with relief, secretly rejoiced, and gloated in their hearts. But even the deceased leader’s covert enemies—he hadn’t had any overt ones for a long time—were in a state of confusion: how could they live without him?
 Pavel Alekseevossible reactions. Toma, who had surprised everyone with her businesslike cool at the funeral of her own mother, was now absolutely choked with grief. For a full two days she sobbed, tak. She literally, in the biblical sense, ate her bread with tears.
 Tanya experlayed. She felt ashamed of her own lack of sensriated Toma’s grief. The latter wept so sweetly and selflessly that out of p a few tiny tears of her own.
 Pavel Alekseeverienced a great sense of relief: there would be changes, now there would be changes. The absurd case of the doctors, ed now. He expected controls to be loosened, and even pulled the folder wtion PROJECT from his bottom drawer. . .
 For her part, though, Vasen now? ”
 Pavel Alekseevich, seeing her consternation, chuckled.
 “We’ll surv! ”
 Elena, hear.
 “When things calm down a bit, I’ll try looking for my family again,” Elena resolved.
 Senetrable mystery. Ten years warents she had no right to submit an inquiry. Elena’s adoptarents lost somewhere in Altai. . .
 “It’s going to be worse now, even worse,” Vasilisa muttered.
 Elena, quiet as always, just shook her head.
 “It won’t be worse, it won’t. . .”
 ATTENDING CLASSES OR GOING TO WORK DURING THOSE days of nathemous. Workers came to work and were gathered at meetings. Upper-echelon, lower-echelon, and lowest-of-the-low-echelon bureaucrats, as well as average Sovreme address: Moscow, Kremlin. . . Then, wor, iterated the same gnarled, sincere words, and sobbed again, only now not on a grandstand, but in the smoking room. . . Certaassion in their hearts, nor tears in their tear glands.
 Chlaced by a kind of exhausting nervous idleness. They read poems about Staleaker. . . Tanya would remember well those quaggy, dragging hours filled with stuffiness and an infernal ennui that exceeded the usual schooltime boredom. The plaster bust strung wlasterlike as the deceased leader. Sky childhood! ” faedestal.
 Theractically the sole male teacher at the school, carried her off to the nurse’s room in his arms, to the undisguised envy of the older girls. The teachers scurrushed each other near the nurse’s room, while Tanya stood at the window in the lavatory watching the snowy blur outside the glass, saddened once again by her own hard-heartedness.
 It was already known that the natrocession would begin at noon the next day in the Hall of Columns in the House of Trade Unions. The, but not on the first day. The girls were worried that they would be deceived and not taken there. Toma was full of determlace in line. For some reason she was sure that only the senior girls and honor students would get to go.
 A rather poor student—although wractical ingenuity.
 Toma found Tanya ects. The coff so that anyone can go see. Wanna go? ”
 “They won’t let us.” Tanya shook her head. “No way Dad will let us go.”
 “We won’t tell him. We’ll just pretend we’re going to school and not say anything. . .”
 Tanya pondered: the proposting. She really wanted to have a look at dead Stalin. She also remembered how they hadn’t taken her to Toma’s mother’s funeral. On the other hand, she had not learned to larents. . .
 The girls left school together. On the last turn toward theed, like a little goat, and announced resolutely,“You do as you want, but I’m going to the Hall of Columns right this instant to find out what’s going on. . .”
 Thendent decision. Usually she followed Tanya’s lead in everything. Tanya stamped about osite directions: Tanya, as usual, turned in the direction of Novoslobodskaya, where they lived, while Toma headed down Kaliaevskaya Street toward the center of town. . .
 At home there was only Vasilisa, and she did not ask where Toma was. Toma returned only toward six. Her absence had passed unnoticed. Before fallered back and forth for a long time. As a result of her excurs in columns. . .
 Tanya slept poorly: she dreamed an unend, but could not. In her dream she was overcome by a sense of duty, and the ortant assignment. . . The asslace. What exactly the hous and, moreover, invisible. All through the nassageway or an elevator. She was supposed to fartment numbers, and no doorways where the numbers might be written. In addosed by her dream included urgent delivery. Yet everyone she encountered was either afraid of her or just mean: no one wanted to talk to her. . .
 Toma woke Tanya very early. A true villager, she always woke easily. The ged into the kitchen. Vasantry. That meant it was not yet six thirty.
 It was a plot, an escape, truancy, and an excursion to boot. Tanya prepared sandwed everything. Usually their father took a thermos with him on long walks, but Tanya did not know where he had hidden it. Toma bo of tea with yesterday’s tea leaves. Tanya lantry, but they had to hurry. Vasilisa ended her obeisances by seven.
 “You wrer.
 “What do I write? ” Toma asked.
 “That we had to leave for school early today.”
 “You write it yourself: you write better than me,” Toma groused.
 “If I wrencil into Toma’s hand. “Write it already.”
 They put on their winter coats. Toma—a new one, bought especially for her not long ago. Tanya—an old one with an extended hem of beaver lamb from another coat. Toma stuck her legs into felt boots with galoshes. Tanya laced up high boots with a fleecy trim. Proud red boots made to order at an atelier for not just anyone. No one had anything like them. Pavel Alekseevleased to see these new additions: it was not good to stand out. But on that day all the petty detarove significant, even these ostentatious boots. . .
 Fockets of their coats, and set off for the Novoslobodskaya metro station. On the metro they only got as far as Belorusskaya. The transfer to the radstairs, they discovered that Gorky Street was cordoned off. They saw an enormous multractical Toma wondered when they had managed to sew so many of them. From there they returned to Novoslobodskaya on foot, turning down Kaliaevskaya Street onto Chekhov Street.
 The closer they approached to Pushkassage to Gorky Street was blocked by trucks and a chain of soldiers. Toma, who knew the cle.
 In this city accustomed to long lines no one had ever seen anything like this line before. For the moment ants would tell for the rest of their lives. But thound sack of grain. . . They had been standress their grief. . . and somethack. Those who l in their hearts stayed home. . . But Tanya had been brought here by the tible to the laws of the herd.
 No one had organarades were usually organized. And the matient lines that slowly and irreversibly closed in on each other.
 The gable of imagining that such an amazing inanity as ballet could even exist in this world. . . They bored the on the corner. The wane, which extended about two feet below the level of the street. A wit just beneath the window. Thet over them like a strange tidal wave.
 The sound came closer, crescendoed, and seemed like something entirely disconnected from the crowd, like the wind or rain. Holded each other even more tightly. The stalled crowd sh window. A woman just in front of them with a big silver fox collar twisted around and let out a wild howl. The pe seemed to have broken her in half. She hung from the pled into it. . . When she fell, she was as dead as the silver fox on her shoulders.
 The g one after the other. They had just seen that woman crushed agaushed against the side of the truck.
 “Get down,” Toma shouted. It was the only direction they could go—down. They were swept under the truck. There, between the wheels, among orphaned galoshes, they lay on the street—jumbled feet and the hems of clothing blocking the light to the right and to the left. It was stuffy and terrifying. Toma began to cry.
 “Don’t cry,” Tanya said. Toma turned her pale face toward her.
 “I feel sorry for Stalin. . .”
 “Then you’re an idiot,” Tanya said in a tired adult voice.
 She dity for Stalin. Inside she felt disgusted, as if by some immoral act. Probably because they had played hooky from school. She was so ashamed and felt so bad for having lied. . . Especially to Dad. . . The famrobably waiting for them with dinner, wondering where they were.
 They lay underneath the truck for quite a long time. It reeked of a public toilet, grease, and gasoline. At one poarted and seemed to thin out a bit.
 “Let’s try gettulled Toma out from under the truck.
 Just at that ed out from their shelter. Whulled in different directions. . . They shouted desperately, but even as they stlints in a river, in the most uncertain of directions. . .
 When they lost each other entanicked terror. Toma was p. The double doors onto the street also had been boarded up from within. Lower down, at the level of Toma’s chest, a part of the wooden door had been pushed art. When Toma was pressed agaace between the two doors and found herself inside, as if in a cabinet. She sat down on her haunches and froze.
 Toma could not recall how many mlaced the next. . . until she saw a familiar red boot. Something lifted her from the ground. She pulled apart the boards and grabbed the leg just above the fleecy fur trim and shouted with all her might,“Tanya! Tanechka! ”
 It felt to Tanya like a dog had seized her by the leg.
 “Where would a dog have come from? ” The thought was running through her head, when suddenly she heard Toma’s voice.
 “Tanechka! This way, down! ”
 Not lettace between the doors. This movement downward toward the ground that killed so many that day saved the girls.
 They reached for each other like long lost lovers, hugged, and froze. At precisely that moment they became sisters. Everythosed by circumstance and until now dubious, even false—had become real. All theled, their faces, extremities, and very souls crushed beyond recognition. . .
 Suddenly Toma burst out,“Tanya, our satchels are behind the radiator in the entranceway! ”
 “The sandwiches, the sandwiches! ” Tanya remembered and pulled the fatally crushed sandwocket.
 They gushed with laughter—who knew why. Most likely because their terror-wracked childish hearts needed this. . .
 In the meantime, Vasilisa Gavrilovna was running through the darkening yards of their neighborhood and howling like a conjurer,“Tanya! Toma! It’s time to come home! ”
 Elena Georginning the black dial with a numb finger. Everywhere the line was busy: the militia, the morgue, the ambulance station. . . Pavel Alekseevich, who had set out after three in the afternoon in search of the girls, also was nowhere to be found. Havrocession’s organizers had managed to re-create the Khodynka massacre in thecenter of a city crisscrossed with streets, lanes, walk-through courtyards, and, after all, metro lines. He could not fed. There was no hope of fed out of the house to go to the funeral.
 He stood on the corner of Kaliaevskaya and Oruzheinaya streets, leaning against the wall of the milk store. He remembered that there were stulling at his sleeve. A crafty goggle-eyed kid looked him in the eye from below.
 “Hey, gramps, want me to take you? ”
 “Where? ” Pavel Alekseevich did not understand right away.
 “I know a way to get through.” The boy gestured ambiguously in the direction of Karetny Lane.
 Pavel Alekseevich waved him off and walked away. His mood could not have been gloomier. At Belorussky Station he saw a whole column of ambulances. . . They were stuck in the roadblock of trucks.
 “A hecatomb, a hecatomb,” Pavel Alekseevrising himself. At the moment, he did not know how right he was.
 16
 PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH NEVER DID LEARN THE FATE OF THE monstrous sample he had brought to the harty office on Staraya Square. Though greatly ressed by his conversation with the mad doctor, the cautious bureaucrat decided not to raise the question of this delicate matter in the Politburo.
 For several years the glass jar stood wrapped ing in honor of the luminous holiday, a cleaning woman carried it out to the big garbage bin in the basement.
 Strangely enough,“Soapface” turned out to be roject to legalize abortions was studied and discussed. The state—havrung in their wombs against their wishes. A few demregnancies.
 The former hlayed. . .
 The fate of the unfortunate hostages of theoke at all conferences connected to infant and maternal welfare. He dhic. He returned once agaeeches about environmental concerns and a multitude of other factors that would adversely affect the next generation’s health. . . The word “ecology” had yet to enter the vernacular.
 In the mated direction. Whhases within the monthly cycle. He focused his attention on women who had given birth to children after long-term infertility. Hecalled such chregnancy after many years of childless marriage.
 At the same time, by way of the work of the renowned Chizhevsky, he embarked on the study of natural cosmic cycles and biorhythms. Embryologrecision. Comparercentage of women could not conceive at night.
 Hhases of activity.
 At the end of 1953 an amazeared during one of Pavel Alekseevich’s office hours. He was an artet-makers, thin, with fine features and swarthy gray hair. Hy of him reduced in size, with the same fine features, the same Persian facial structure. The lilac-tinged red silk of her dress,the emerald green of her shawl, her antique dark-silver jewelry. . .
 Their tests showed that there was nothing wrong. Two healthy human beings who in twenty years of marriage had not given birth even to one little girl. . . The grief and disgrace of the wife.
 Pavel Alekseevich looked at them for an indecently long time and listened: his secret adviser insisted.
 “You must lie with your wife when the sun is at its zenith,” Pavel Alekseevich said in a strict tone of voice. “A year from now come to see me. . .”
 The couple arrived not a year, but a year and a half later. And they brought with them a marvelous belly—taut, high, and with a beautiful little girl inside, whom Pavel Alekseevich himself delivered, and then, two years later, a boy. . .
 Azerbaatients came from those areas. Then Russians began to come. Approx. Some couples he recommended move to the East—to Vladment of his ideas having to do with natural rhythms and time zones. . . The table of his office was now covered with charts no one could make any sense of and that looked more like astrological tables than test results. The numbers of “Abraham’s” children continued to grow. And of each Pavel Alekseev down in his heart, “Today I gave birth to you. . .” A child of midday, a child of dawn, a child of sunset. . . Expensets, Chinese vases, and French bronze. . . He never charged a fee, but he also never refused donations. From tayment for their services. As a rule, hiness. The poor either were not childless or did not go to doctors. . .
 Both classriests. . . He was searching for something in these Sibylline allegories. . . The secret of conception—that was what interested him. Nothing more and nothing less.
 His own wife had securely locked the door of their bedroom to him for all times of the day. He had long ago gended marital relations. Followed feeling like a woman. But she was just over forty, and over the years her beauty had grown all the more expressive. Her face seemed as erienced artist. The maternal puffeared in her eyes—one of keen attention directed not outwardly, but inwardly. . . At times it seemed to Pavel Alekseevich that while answering his infrequent questions she was thinking of something else.
 Relations between husband and wife could not be called bad: as before, they guessed each other’s desires, sometimes read each other’s thoughts, and avoided having their eyes meet. She looked at his neck, and he at the bridge of her nose. . .
 17
 TANYA WAS HER PARENTS’ JOY. CODDLING AND INDULGING hressed his concealed love for his wife. Elena felt that and was grateful to him for it, but answered him in a strange way by giving Toma more attention and care. A certalates. Tht Vasilisa had forgotten about food rationing, ration cards, and ration stations.
 Tanya grew ursuits, be it music, drawing, or the sciences. . .
 In school they were already approachrofession, but Tanya was torn in different directions. Before Toma had appeared  music. For hecially for her. Pavel Alekseevonse.
 Const what came out of the radio transmitter.
 Tanya now found her father’s library more and more alluring. As always, Pavel Alekseevany of a silent Vasilisa or a reserved Elena, he ever more often found Tanya in his study settled in a cozy nest of twothrow blankets and sofa cushions, cat and book in hand. . . Near Tanya on the edge of a chair, with no comforts whatsoever, sat Toma, just as small as she had been at twelve, only fatter. One after the next she embro. Her hunger—long ago forgotten and seemoor. . .
 The gattern, so Toma wondered how anyone could sit half the day with their head stuck in a boring book.
 Observoint of view, fell to theorizing, noticing here too the manifestations of some great laws of nature that while not yet formulated nonetheless objectively existed.
 Just as from the moment of ferthysical functions engage at strictly regulated intervals in strictly determined sequence. The chewrecede the sucking reflex. Yet both are stiece of solid food on gums swollen from teething arouses the instinct to chew at the age of six months.
 The funct girls in his own family. Needs awakened at a certaossibly, die. Needs, therefore, precede necessities.
 “They’ll accuse me of Lamarckism.” Pavel Alekseevich laughed to himself.
 “It’s posss, and they never did make their way to Pavel Alekseevich’s consciousness. But there was no other person for whom thoetry. . .
 The ch, will turn and fidget. Extend a finger toward it, and it will grab it and do what it so thirsts to do but still does not know it does. It w. When. Otherwise it, like a child raised by animals, will never learn to walk on two legs but, like an animal, will move on all fours.
 Gencil when it gets the urge to draw, a book when it has matured to this level of obtaining information. . . How tragened from within, but the moment has been lost and the world makes no effort to meet that need halfway. . .
 Take Tomochka. Her mother had left her door woman had to go to work and there was no one to look after the little girl, and daycare was not even imaginable in blacked-out, evacuated Moscow. When Tomochka was set on the floor, she already had no urge to walk. She sat layed with rags. She saw her first book only in school, when she was seven years old. Everything had been held back, everything slowed down. The poor little girl. . .
 But Toma hardly thought of herself as unfortunate. Just the opposite, she was thoroughly convinced that she had drawn a winning ticket. A year after her ise village life with all her heart. She was horrigs, babysat Fenya’s three-month-old little daughter, and laundered filthy rags in cold water. . . Silently and unwillingly she did everything, never disobeying Fenya. Twice she traveled by bus to a distant village to visit her brothers. Her brothers horreasants. Toma felt neity for them. Loving them was out of the question.
 By the tossible in order to remain forever in the Kukotsky family.
 Toma was completely unconcerned about whether she was loved in her new family. In theet. There was absolutely nothe of fish.
 Toma had her own bed lace at the table between Tanya and Elena Georgievna, and many other things that she had never had before when she lived with her mother: her own comb and toothbrush, her own towels in the bathroom, and a nightshirt—the existence of which she could not even have imagined before. In return nothing was asked of her. Surprisingly, much larger demands were made of Tanya—for misbehaving, for returning home late from school, and for the untidiness Tanya was constantly guilty of. Toma would cover for Tanya. Somet she had left on the table, and, sometimes, when they were late returning from school, she would take the blame for their tardiness.
 “Aunt Vasya, they made me stay after to redo an assignment, and Tanya waited for me. . .”
 And Vas grumbling. She would even refrations. . .
 As for their studies, there was nothing to be said. Tanya was practically an honor student. All she lacked was vanity to become a straight-A student. In the tent living in their household Toma had succeeded in becoming a solid C student. The complication lay in that everyone was dissatisfied with Tanya’s Bs, but overjoyed by Toma’s rare B. A certabringing. Ideas of equality concerned Elena somewhat—memories of her Tolstoyan childhood were still keen. Vasilisa did not nibble at the bait.
 “Tanechka letely different.”
 For that reason she would say to Toma sly,“Let me teach you how to brine cabbage, fry fritters, and other things, otherwise when I die you won’t know how to do anything. . .”
 Tanya’s lack of such skride. It was precantry as a result of Pavel Alekseevich’s longtime ban. In Tanya’s early childhood he had adamantly forbidden Vasilisa to have any conversations of any sort with the child about the divine. For that reason Vasrayers and instructed her in any and all difficult situations to turn to the Mother of God.
 “In mathematics too? ” Tomochka hans.
 “What about Holy Queen Tamara? ” Toma remtism.
 Vasletely different things. . .”
 IN THE KUKOTSKY HOUSEHOLD TOMA BEHAVED EXACTLY as demanded by her role as adopted child. Placleasing and useful. Wh down in her heart, feared only Elena Georgievna.
 Her relatlicated. On the one hand, Vasleasant thing about Toma. Whiritual realm as well. It did not work out. If Toma, at f away from Vasilisa—having figured out, likely, that she had no need for Vasilisa’s underground valuables—and grazed exclusively alongside Tanya, while Tanya buried herself in her father’s books, dragged her to the cinema, to the theater, and to concerts, and these outings were not just for culture’s sake: boys were also involved, which made an immense difference to Toma.
 In Tanya’s presence she played an unenvany of young men suited her entirely. Just as she had once relleasure in the fact that boys bought their tickets, took them to the refreshment stand, and treated them to soft drinks and cake. . .
 The boys d they bore witness to the fact that Toma’s social status in society was very good because she got to go to the Bolshoi Theater, the Maly Theater, and the Art Cinema, and was treated to free refreshments in addition.
 Among the young men attracted to Tanya’s sle gaiety, obvious good looks, and curly hair, were the Goldberg brothers, who had been enamored of Tanya since that horrible winter in 1953 when they went to Pavel Alekseevich’s to be fed. The feeded: the boys’ mother died soon after Ilya Iosifovich was released, and the old geneticist, who had courageously survived his last arrest without having to sign a single false statement, was totally destroyed by the death of his forty-year-old wife.
 He fell apart physs. His only salvation was the work with which he loaded himself down beyond measure. He revt writing his genius book about genius. Goldberg’s home lers came and left, one after the next. One stole, the other drank. The thected of being an agent of the KGB. In a word, icion, which was not life-threatening, but also not conducive to good digestion.
 Once agaetition with Tanya, and that it was time to figure out why those boys had taken to visiting every Sunday as well as on the occasional weekday. . .
 The Goldberg brothers were oint of being indistinguishable, but Tanya clearly favored the one who was studying to be a doctor. On Sundays they often lhysiology. . .
 The second brother, Gennady, who had chosen physut to him. . .
 NINTH GRADE CAME TO AN END, AND IT WAS DECIDED that for their last summer vacation from school the girls would go to Yalta. Pavel Alekseevart in a conference on infertility. Pavel Alekseevich laughed to himself: infertility interested Switzerland, the richest country in the world, but not China, Asia, or Africa. . . Pavel Alekseevortunity to travel to Yalta in his stead. She held out for a long time, and even argued slightly with Elena on this score, but in the end she agreed, on the condition, though, that first she would leave for three days to take care of her own affairs. And she left. . .
 Owointed day. But the delay was compensated for by the notes of dent on the shore of the Black Sea.
 All the women vacationers saw the sea for the first time. And each in her own way. Vasilisa found evidence of the might and wisdom of the great Lord God. The mountaroduced this grand inventory. Stoation—in the absence of cooking, laundering, and cleaning—was to sit idly on their terrace looking out in the direction of the mountains, her face immobile, her gaze arrested, as if beyond those mountains there were still others visible to her alone. . . From tired babble. . . “If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the warts of the sea, thou art there too. . . Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength. . . The Lord lenteous in mercy. . . For he commandeth and raiseth the stormy wind. . .”
 Food at the resort was abundant, whlace at the table assigned them and enjoyed the service. The waitresses served her food, asked her why she had again not come for lunch and should they bring her anything else. . . Her satisfaction was tinged with a certain uneasiness, because in her not-great but tenacious mind she knew well that if someone has more than she needs, then someone else does not have enough. . . And her Chrerienced a bit of shame. In the end she admlace, because all this made her feel guilty.
 Toma felt no guilt at all. She and Tanya exulted llashed, swam, and sunbathed with no thoughts for anything else. It became apparent tains vacationing at the military sanatorium next door.
 In the evenings the girls set off for the dances held in the cafeteria or on the embankment. Tanya danced, whular. Toma went only for Tanya’s sake; left to her own dev with this shameful boredom. She was somewhat surprised that intelligent Tanya found anything good in a dance called “a fast foxtrot” or “a slow tango.”
 At 11:00 P.M. Elena Georg. Sometear for half the night. Theied the one without a terrace.
 Credulous Elena turned out to be unprepared for such craftart and never discovered Tanya’s midnight adventures. Tanya’s fre aftershave and gave off an odor of boot wax and military action. Tanya rolledwith laughter, and the young men—already slightly intimidated by her youthful beauty—retreated, hurt. In a word, Tanya brought back not a s to the South. She had the best time of her life.
 Toma, on the other hand, acqurofound love in Crimea. On an excursrinces. It happened at the very end of thearture. Overall, the excursion to the gardens fizzled: the bus broke down and took a long time to fix, then the weather deteriorated, and although it never rained, the midday sun darkened, and the elegant luster of the South Shore grew turbid.
 At the entrance to the Botanical Gardens they had to wait for their guide, who had gone to attend to other matters as a result of their delay. They stood alongslaque engraved with:“The Botanical Gardens were established in 1812 by Kh. Kh. Steven, a graduate of the St. Petersburg Medical Academy. . .” There was no one there to tell them that Chrecimens collected by Kukotsky himself. . .
 Faths. It was cool and mysterious. The gulants. . .
 Toma was a cersonal reasons. When she had spent her summer months oor. For her, forest, fond to rinse laundry. Here in Crimea in the Botanical Gardens nature was selfless: it demanded no laborious effort. Even the sea, the salty water that no one had to haul in buckets from under the hill, had been createdexclusively for the joy of swimming and diving.
 Toma surreptaths of the Botanical Gardens, filling her fingers with a joy they had never known before. Insuffrived as ever of the loving touch without which a living thing suffers, falls ill, and withers. . . Perhaps her small secial unknown vitamin. . .
 Theletely magical voice, and what he said was a real fairy tale.
 “Here we have an acacointing to a small tree covered with sweet yellow blossoms, “one of the greatest trees ever. Accordtian goddess Hathor, the Great Cow, who gave birth to the sun and the stars, also could assume the identity of an acacia tree, the tree of life and of death. Acacia was the oracle of one of the great goddesses of fertility in Western Asia, and even the ancient Jews, who rejected idolatry, were seduced by the acacia: they called it the ‘shittim tree,’ and in ancient times built the Ark of the Covenant from it .. .”
 Of all the threhensible, but cool. It turned out that every tree and every bush, and even the tresence in the world. Wharison with a fir tree or a daisy she meant nothing. . .
 She also got the feellants as well as an equality with them in their insignificance.
 “Probably among all these plants there’s one that’s exactly like me. . . If I saw it, I would recognize it right away,” Toma thought, stroking a rhododendron or boxwood as she walked.
 Tanya and Toma almost never coincided in either their thoughts or their feelings, and if they did, it was exclusively thanks to Toma’s ability to adjust herself to Tanya’s thought waves. Thlant, what kind would I be?
 At the shop near the exlants and a boring book calledFlora of Crimea.
 That day the quests—was resolved.
 Stare for exams. Tanya had set her st medicine. But Tanya talked lied Tanya with the same. It was very romanthysician’s everyday routine. As for Toma, Pavel Alekseevich took her to the Timiryazev Agricultural Academy. There they were greeted werimental fields of corn and soybeans, and the laboratories. What  rotations, cursing at the collective farm office, and village melancholy. On the way home she told Pavel Alekseevlants. Pavel Alekseevlain to his foster daughter that once she received an education, she could work at the Botanical Gardens or at the Institute of Medicinal Plants, or anywhere else, but Toma would hear none of it: she did not understand why she needed an education if she could workat the Botanical Gardens without one. What she wanted most was to admlants, to care for them, to touch them occasionally, and to inhale their smells. . . In the meantuttered with lemon and tangerine seeds. . .
 18
 AND SO IT CAME TO PASS THAT A YEAR LATER TANYA TOOK unrofession.
 Tanya dted into the evening division. By September 1 she had to get a job loyment. Pavel Alekseevment. Pavel Alekseevich’s request was modest: would they hire his daughter, a student in the evening division of the biology faculty, as a lab assistant? Professor Gansovsky chuckled and said that he could take her as soon as tomorrow.
 Pavel Alekseevride and joy several days later. Tanya recognediatric cardiologist. . . But now she entered through the battered door of the yard entrance, through a corridor with a black board with numbered tags hanging from it. Therience. She was coming to be hired for a job.
 Professor Gansovsky losed to give him the weighty volume.
 Old Professor Gansovsky’s relatrolific. He was already over seventy, h chestnut. Ht their natural black, and for that reason his entire henhouse debated constantly whether he dyed his eyebrows, and with what. . . Despaint and not quite mating colors—sooner caused frustration than scorn. Not tall, but broad-chested, with large birthmarks on his cheeks, he resembled an old boxer, in the canine sense as well. In hortionately long arms and, if truth be told, had not been left dissatisfied. Pavel Alekseevhy. In order to know goss you have to take a certain interest in it. Pavel Alekseeverformance. On the other hand, Pavel Alekseevublications on embryogenesis of the brain, and for this reason considered him a suitable mentor for Tanya.
 Tanya was led rofessor’s office. There were bookcases w. . . In the space between the wower. . .
 “I’m gout you, Tatiana Pavlovna, in the hands of my student, MarLena Sergeevna. She werform the necessary histologic work. She’s a great master of slarations. We’ll start with that. . . and take it from there. . .”
 Reed and deliberateness of a tennis ball. He gestured with his arm for them to follow.
 The laboratory was located ied two floors as well as some recesses between floors with windows adjacent either to the floor or to the ceiling, as if the building’s two former floors had been remodeled as three. The two honored academed a beat with every smell—from the animal facility, of something chemical, boiled, stinging and nasty, and yet attractive. Probably a young geriences the same sensations her first time backstage.
 The corridor took its last turn near a fire hose curled like a snake behind a glass door, and they entered the inner sanctum. . . It was all glass and crystal, transparent and splendid. There was an old laboratory table warent shelves with gleaming instruments laid out inside, and racks of laboratory glassware with sterilized insides. A wonderland of small glass tubules, of spherical and conic flasks. . .
 Ord edges. Mer details and various screws gleaming—stood with horns raised. Torsion scales shone under glass covers that thickened unevenly toward the bottom. . . And there was a great variety of still other, yet unfamiliar objects that attracted Tanya’s enchanted gaze.
 At the marble laboratory table stood a tall, unattract. Her face expressed fasteccability. . . Her mederformed the most delicate movements with her fingers.
 Glancologizing that she needed a few more minutes to finish.
 “It’s old German equrise.
 “Yes, all prewar. Brought from Germany. But so far we haven’t figured out a way to make anything better yet. Jena optics, you know, Solingen steel. . . ,” Gansovsky smirked. “I brought it back myself. Thment here is from Humboldt University. . .”
 But Tanya did not hear what they were talking about. She could not take her eyes off MarLena Sergeevna as the latter worked the sataration table with exquisite tiny scissors and thin tweezers. Nearby on the marble tabletop lay a whole strulsive-looking dental surgery tray.
 “MarLena Sergeevna, I’ve brought to you the daughter of our dear Doctor Kukotsky. A buddrofessor heh-hehhed rather disgustingly, “for you to train. Why don’t you have a chat with the girl while I show Pavel Alekseevich the laboratory. . .”
 They left, leaving Tanya. MarLena Sergeevna nodded to her.
 “Come closer and take a look at what I’m doing. . .”
 And Tanya looked. The scholarly woman destlex thing created by nature, the brain tissue—below, removed a cranial bone the thickness of a child’s fingernail. . .
 After slheres and the two olfactory bulbs that jutted forward. Not a scratch or cut could be seen on the mirror-form surface. The braearl. Watula, Tanya noticed a faint network of blood vessels barely visible to the eye. A moment ago the braarent liquid. . . The contaeas that had already managed to shrivel a bit. . .
 “This requires great concentration and accuracy,” MarLena Sergeevna said. “Actually, small cuts along the ser layers of the brain. . .”
 As she spoke, she raitated trunks whose heads had been sacrificed to the lofty and bloodthirsty god of science. . . Thitated,” as MarLena Sergeevna said, made nausea rise from Tanya’s stomach to her throat. She gulped back saliva. . .
 “My lrecisely cutting off its little head. She tossed the slread out the head on the object glass. After whride: “Well, do you think you can do that? ”
 “I can,” Tanya answered without hesitating for a moment. She was far from sure that she really could.
 “I have to,” she saer ring of the scissors with her thumb. Crunch—and the little head fell onto the object glass.
 “Good job,” a soft female vorovingly.
 The sacrted. Tanya had passed the test and was riestess.
 19
 AS THE YEARS PASSED, PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH FOUND MORE and more sense in reading the ancient historians.
 “It’s the only thed his firm, iodine-framed fingernail on the leather cover ofThe Twelve Caesars.
 As Vasilisa cleaned his study, he sat in the girls’ room, awaiting the end of this monthly ritual. In surprise Tanya raised one thin brow with its hereditary brush in the corner.
 “I don’t see any connection, Dad.”
 “How should I put it? Julravity. Yet everytherty of history.”
 Tanya sat up on her pillow.
 “But it’s sort of sad to think that everything is so senseless and all the victims have died in vain.”
 Pavel Alekseevich grinned and stroked his book’s shagreen cover.
 “What victims? There are no victims. There id, sometimes senseless, but more often malicious and mercenary. . . A thousand or so years from now, Tanechka, or perhaps fhs about Khrushchev. And a bunch of anecdotes. . .”
 Tanya smiled.“That’s not so, Dad. They wressed them.”
 “That wen when there’s true communism,” Toma inserted wistfully as she carefully bathed an ailingMonstera deliciosa.
 Pavel Alekseevich was in a good mood and allowed himself to joke.
 “No, Tomochka, it will be only after that. . .”
 “I should ask Tanya later what he meant by that,” Toma decided. No one had ever told her that anything could come after communism. Although, ultimately, what difference would it make, since we won’t be around anyway. . . She had somethots. She stroked the leaves’ surfaces ws of her fingers: yes, they really were softer. And there seemed to be a slant.
 “Oh, no, not a virus! ” she thought in horror, forgetting about communism forever. She was already a rather experlants—one in the square in front of the Bolshoi Theater, and the other in the greenhouse that sent them seedlings. In both cases the ved out the marigolds and the gillyflower. But these were her plants, her favorites, and Toma stuck the thumb of her left hand in her mouth and chewed in concentration at the root of her nail. . . Havlants and jars with evergreens.
 At fotted her nurslings. Elena bought clay pots and planters, but the tlying. Once the wied, the vernicose army advanced to the dining room table and the desks, and then descended to the floor. The nursery, wh.
 The abundant vegetatractically never at home. In the early mornast eleven, dead tired. On days when she had no classes she also deared for hours on end, either visiting friends or at various entertainments. Toma gradually stopped partating in Tanya’s life after hours. Tanya had taken up wartment.
 Elena usually arrlants. Toma’s workday ended early, and by four thirty she was already at home. Grumblarately.
 Pavel Alekseevlant, two shifts back-to-back. In addrovincial obstetricians and old midwives who, if they had received any medical training at all, had long ago forgotten what it had consisted of. He completely neglected his duties as a member of the Academy. Leriors. Hutation as an alcoholic was augmented by rumors of his eccentricity.
 Long ago the upper echelons at the Mlaced first by an old KGB man trained in veterinary medicine, then by a famous surgeon who was also a ruthless careerist and a thief. Wers he himself had long ago forgotten still lay in the safe of the new minister, who occasionally skimmed them, to no avail.
 Desperiors, Pavel Alekseevich’s influence in medical circles was unusually far-reaching. All those provlications. . . He wrote several textbooks for mh on questions of infertility.
 But hatients, who came to him with their damaged wombs, their malfunctions, and their fears. He saw them at consultatrivate consultations. Although the Kremleration. . .
 In one secterformed dilatation and curettage, some of which was in fact diagnostic. . . It was practain. . . In th all sixteen hands at a time. The most primitive of anesthetics—local administration of Novocain—twenty-five minutes of work, an ice bag to freeze the belly, and next in line. . .
 Pavel Alekseevich seldom came into this section. He conserations in moral terms both for the woman and for the doctor. . . Was  beyond the limits of biological law, to breed not at the will of natural rhythms, but of one’s own desire? Was this not where human choice, the right to freedom, ultimately was realized?
 Vasinion. From the moment she replaced her adulation of Pavel Alekseevich with total rejection he even began to relate to her more seriously in a way. Her posoint of view, even ignorant and inhumane, but in its own way moral. What was sad was that her obscurantist abhorrence of abortion had influenced Elena, whom she had inculcated with Christian-church intolerance. Vasilisa’s semiliteracy combined quite harmoniously with her views. But Elena? How could he explale of an invidious world. . . Besregnancy. Perhaps the only throcedures. But that was beetent student of his. . . No, there was another aspect that preoccupregnancy termination, the hormonal consequences thereof, and how to assist the body in recovering from this condition with minimal damage. . .
 The dhy of medicine. He made absolutely no attempt to organize his scattered thoughts into something orderly or intelligible. . . Ilya Ioslans. . .
 Unleering fixedly into the bottomless breach of the world. From there came all that was lread their thighs before him never gave a second thought.
 Immortalted into his hands hundreds, thousands, an unending stream of wet, screaming creatures. . .
 Whenever Ilya Ios him in midflight.
 “You, Ilyusha, are a hot-sh about. So those heathens iral of yours. They have good financing. The Swment in my clinic was made in what year? Nineteen hundred and four.And the centrifuge in your office, when was it made? ”
 “That’s just the point, Pasha. If we had their money, we’d run rings around them. Our upcomotential! ” For a moment hlaced by a warm shadow. “You know my Vitaly turns out to have a terrific head on his shoulders. Just terrific! Too bad he’s leanhysics. Blum seduced him. . . Don’t you understand, Pavel, give us their money. . .”
 “Where do they get their money from, Ilya? ” Pavel Alekseevich tossed Goldberg some bait, and he bit instantaneously.
 “The colonloitation. You’re like a child, Pavel. Amazing.”
 Pavel Alekseevich nodded.
 “Child. Child. You’re the child, Ilyusha. A case of gerontologox. I’m prescriritus vini, one hundred and fifty grams three times daily. How, after ee-ri-al-ism? ”
 Pavel Alekseeved a slab of fatback on a heavy chunk of bread—the way Vasilisa liked to lay it on, thick. . . This time they were drinking in Pavel Alekseevich’s study. Nowadays Goldberg frequently dropped artments of his Moscow friends.
 Goldberg would jump up, overturn a chalate off the desk.
 “Because of types les like me. . . ,” the wounded Goldberg wailed. “My father had an account in a Swiss bank, he was a timber merchant! With a house on the Moika, and a house on Lubyanka Street. And a dacha in Yalta! Socially, I’m a dead man. I’m not the one to tell them thatthey’re vles. Who would listen to me? As far as this country’s concerned, I’m guilty for life.”
 “Okay, so you’re guilty. But what am I guilty of as far as this country’s concerned? ” Pavel Alekseeverfectly well what his best friend would accuse him of.
 “What? Your father was a general! He had control of. . .”
 Pavel Alekseevich yawned, shook his head, and asked Elena to give them a folding bed and linen. She had everything ready. She loved Ilya Iosifovich and felt sorry for him.
 Ilya Iosifovich snored on his folding bed, defeated by fatigue and alcohol. Unable to fall asleep owection. How much moral majesty and erson! A Jewish dzhigit! Was atriot syndrome? Lsoriasis or Gaucher’s disease.
 Pavel Alekseevatient, a young Jew who had given birth to a second child with Gaucher’s disease. A genetic ailment. . . Goldberg had sales with high frequencies of consanguineous marriages. And blurted something about curing humankind through miscegenation. He practle. . . In fact, when examined closely, everyone was sick. Everyone around was sick. His current assistant, Gorshkov, was sick with hate for his mother-in-law. Even the quality of his voice changed when he talked about her. But what’s the point of talking about her: a cantankerous old woman with a bad heart and diabetes? His nurse, Vera Antonovna, was mad about microbes: she ran her own underwear through the sterilizer. . . And Lenochka? With those dreams of hers. . . ? Her eyes look inward, and what does she see there? You ask her someth. Her face is filled with fright, tension. Toma whots; Vasilisa makes the sign of the cross over the stove before she turns on the gas. . . It’s one big madhouse. Tanechka erson with normal reactions. But even she’s been looking bad of late. Pale. With circles under her eyes. Eushing herself too hard, or. . . Maybe we should do an X-ray?
 “I’ll talk to her on Sunday,” Pavel Alekseevich resolved.
 Sunday mornings were usually their own, when they were absolutely alone. The evening before Vasilisa usually left town for services somewhere. Of late, Elena, who had never gone to church before, had taken to attendite Pavel Alekseevich. True, she dlace as Vasilisa. She had found a priest, a former architect, in some old church on the Ostozhenka, with whom she could also talk about her drafting dreams. Toma headed out to worsh rhododendrons and oleanders at the Botanical Garden.
 Sunday mornings belonged wholly to Tanya and Pavel Alekseevich. They had breakfast together and spent an hour or two dolitics. At noetsas well as those of new, fresh-baked writers. Sometealed to her. It was ortant for them to tell each other about everything. Polillaries.
 Tanya had mastered the skrecision and dexterity, and she loved everything about it. She prepared stains, hematoxylins, using antiquated, almost medieval formulas. She spent hours evaporating, settling, filtering, and redistilling. She told Pavel Alekseevich about her achievements, and he grinned: nothing had changed, everything was the same. When he had been a student they had studarations stained in the same way. With Erhlich’s hematoxylin. Kulchitsky stain. . .
 Tanya enjoyed the entaraffined brain. A throcessing. . . Only Old Lady Versonal laboratory assistant’s—slides were better than Tanya’s. But Vikkers had not done anything else for the last fifty years. Besassion.
 Tanya told her father eration she had learned together with MarLena Sergeevna. They extracted a pregnant b inside the brain there was a certain mysterious gland. When the halus, that is, water on the brain. . . That eration was done well, and the rat did not miscarry or devour her defective young, and gave birth on time. Ultosed to lead to an understanding of the causes underlying this birth defect and, moreover, even more ultimately, to deliver humankind from this grave, but fortunately rather rare, affliction.
 Tanya delrocess under way. . . From Tanya’s secifically on the details he recognized in her someone who was one with him by nature—a doer.
 Pavel Alekseevich listened with sincerest attention—this kind of scientific enthusiasm was very familiar to him. . . Tanya had just completed her second year at the b in the game of science that Pavel Alekseevich understood so well. “Stity she didn’t go into medicine. She has good hands, but she’ll spend her life gutting rats,” the old doctor thought to himself.
 In his treasured nocturnal jottings during those months he noted:“The windbags have achieved a stranglehold like never before. A preponderance of people has evolved whose professid and even malicious word-mongering. The entire nation has been divided into talkers and doers. Whole ointments have been created—it’s a terrible virus. What a relecies of doers. One’s job, one’s profession is the only thing one can stand on. Everything else is in flux.”
 The laboratory studment. Morphologlace those damaged or defective. Often they used the technerimentally infusing dye into the vascular system. The blood was gradually replaced by dye, and e. Therformed on a live animal. Its heart would beat, not hav. More often, though, the erformed on a dead animal that had already been subjected to various scientific interventions. It was sler, but the blood vessels did not fill as well with dye. The sets of rocedures differed somewhat, and it was at this relatively insignificant juncture that a decisive turn in fate awaited Tanya.
 On one of thet the keys to the case that held all the laboratory’s instruments. Now anyone who els, and saws—the frightening and beautiful tools required for cutting and sawing bone tissue. There, downstaerating room, they cut not just rats, but cats, and dogs, and rabbits. . . But Tanya’s praring the thinnest of histological sections, and she was good at this work.
 IN THE SPRING OF 1960 TANYA COMPLETED HER EXAMS wortunity to transfer to the day division. She refused, without even consulting her family. Although night school really was difficult, she had no intention of quitting the laboratory. Her real life was there, among the beakers, the rats, the slide sections, and in close communication with MarLena Sergeevna. Gansovsky haying attention to her. Old Lady Vlace. MarLena Sergeevna guessed her boss’s lanning to transfer to the day division. A murely work-based situation. As usual in such intrigues, Tanya was clueless.
 Durital. Unthanages. Durerimental” sections of their dissertations. Lerating room was in use every day and on a rigid schedule. Tanya’s responsonsible for sterilizing and issuing instruments.
 The incident that would become the most significant in her entire life began very ordinarily and banally. Holdolio-stricken leg, asked to be issued a set of instruments for ink injections.
 “What are you injecting? ” Tanya asked matter-of-factly.
 “A human embryo,” answered Raya.
 Jangl asked matter-of-factly,“Alive or dead? ”
 “Dead,” cute Raya responded calmly, then s staircase down into the half-basement. . .
 She had already rumbled to the bottom of the staing the wall with her hand in search of the light switch when Tanya suddenly realized what exactly she had asked about. . . Reallace, took off her white lab coat and hung it on a hanger, and left the laboratory. She would never return there. Nor would she return to the university. Her romance with science had ended at that very moment, forever.
 20
 FOR A WEEK SHE SAID NOTHING. IN THE MORNING, AS usual, she left the apartment, set off on foot to wherever—downtown, to Maryina Roshcha, or the Timiryazev Academy. Never had she had so much free time. Summer had come late, and although idation of the old wooden houses—lovely and homey. Tanya wandered untark bench. . .
 She felt strange, torn. It seemed as rocess not a baby rat or kitten or little rabbit, but a live child, a being with a name, a surname, and a birthday. . . Is every person that close to commtional?
 Wander again. Once, ed out into the street. She made her way through famhosed into gigantic theater sets. The moon came out, qurison. The wrocess. . .
 By s. When Toma began to rouse her, she muttered that she was not going anywhere today. . . Then Elena came and bent over her.
 “Tanyush, what happened? You aren’t sick, are you? ”
 Pulling the sheet over her head, Tanya answered in a clear voice,“I’m not sick. I’m sleeping. Leave me alone.”
 Elena was dumbfounded: what kind of an answer was that? Tanya was never rude. . .
 Tanya woke in time for lunch. No one was at home; even Vasilisa had gone off somewhere. Tanya was delose or sense. . . Palikha, Samoteka, Meshchanskie streets. . . Wooden houses, the last remnants of the old city. . .
 Of course, she was prepared to talk about erson in her life, the most intelligent and most learned—would have to say to her. But her father was not around; he had left on an urgent buserating,or at a consultation, or in Prague, or in Warsaw. . .
 Another possibility was to talk to Vitalka Goldberg, but he was moonlighting at a collective farm in the Kostroma region. . . As for talking to her mother, Toma, or Vasilisa—she might as well ask the cat for advice. . .
 When Tanya returned home, Toma had already tumbled into bed, her mother for some reason was not at home, and Vasilisa was sitting in the kitchen sorting buckwheat.
 “Will you eat something? ” Vasilisa asked.
 Tanya did not feel like eating. She poured herself some tea, sat down opposite Vasilisa, and stunned her with a question.
 “Vas, what do you thtion or only at birth? ”
 Vasilisa bulged her one buttonlike good eye and answered without the slightest hesitation.
 “Everyone knows: at conception. When else? ”
 “Is that church doctrine or what you think? ”
 Vasilisa ingenuously knotted her brow. She suffered from the perslicated than the first.
 “What are you torturing me for? Ask your father: he knows better.” She suddenly became angry.
 “I w on the table, walked out of the kitchen.
 Vasilisa closed her eye and wondered,“That’s no accident. . . Why does she suddenly need to know about all that? Maybe I should wher something to Elena? ”
 But, in fact, in Vasilisa’s eyes, Elena herself was not entirely trustworthy.
 21
 PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH ARRIVED FROM POLAND WITH A SUITcase full of presents. As usual, he had gone  he saw and bought everything there, including the suitcase. The shop turned out by chance to specoor taste. Vasilisa and Toma oohed and aahed over the beautiful things, while Tanya and her mother only smiled at each other understandingly. . . Father had missed his target. However, the white shoes were just in time for both Elena and Tanya. . . Three more days passed before Sunday morning, which Tanya so awaited. By this time over the course of her senseless walks she had arrived at a whole theory for rejecting the foolish, insane, rotten world, by whose laws she absolutely refused to live.
 At breakfast she told her father about the main incident. Very restrarecisely. He needed no ted the heart of the matter.
 “You understand, what I want to talk about? ” she concluded her story.
 He sat silently, and Tanya waited also in silence for what he would say. He remembered her as a three-year-old, then as a f young woman with the sad face all the silly nicknames of her childhood: Big-eyed Squirrel, Cherry, Kitten. . . Was there another defeat lying in wait for him?
 “You want to talk about professionalism? ” he asked his daughter.
 “Precisely.” She nodded.
 “You see, a profession is a way of looking at things. The professrofession.”
 “Dad, I’ve read about the SS doctors. They conducted expereratures and various chemical substances. They performed experrisoners already sentenced to be executed. Exterminated, I mean.”
 “Yes, yes, I know. Terrible business. They were later tried at the Nuremberg Trials. You’re right. This conflict essentially exists.” He rubbed his eyes, which had immediately grown tired of this conversation. “Only don’t forget that the sentence—both the doctors’ and theatients’—in a certain sense had been signed in advance.”
 Tanya arched her brows.
 “Are you tryle are mortal? If we take that into consideration, then it’s even worse. Even more heinous. There’s not a drop of sense in anything then. Rathology ward, this tiny little body with a head three feet in diameter. A thin film of skin stretched over a huge bubble of water. And no rats are going to save him. Which means it’s better to kill him and do a vivisection on him? ”
 “That ossibility. That’s idiotic reasoning.” Pavel Alekseevich shrugged his shoulders. “She’s played out to the end. “In our ltable from available alternatives, and sometimes it is a choice between life and death. Medicine has its own code of ethics. Take Hocrates and read him: he’s already written about this. There are predetermrofession when it comes to a choice between the life of the child and the life of the mother, usually the choice is to save the life of the woman. It doesn’t happen that rarely. As for your expereculative: for a minute it occurred to you that you could turn out to be a murderer. . .”
 Tanya ted her father.
 “Dad, it didn’t just occur to me. What have I been doing these two years? Murdering rats. I’ve slashed a whole mountain of rats. It seemed really easy. Sn. . . As a result. . . Some barrier just sort of broke down. . .”
 “No, no, no. That’s for your mother. I know nothing and don’t want to know anything about those barriers. There. And erson, to learn how to treat only one human disease, hundreds of thousands—whatever number—of animals need to be destroyed, there is no question.”
 “Dad, you don’t understand. I’m talking about something else. Lord take the rats. I’m talking about me. What’s happened to me? ” Tanya stretched out her amazingly thin arms.
 “I don’t see any tragedy here. It’s a questrofessional. You h. That happens.”
 “One helluva bump! What’s with you? Don’t you understand? I’m cuttses, in order to achieve some result. In order to dens to me that makes me lose my fundamentalvalues: I lose sight of the difference between the life of a human being and a rat. . . I don’t want to be the good little girl who cuts rats anymore! ” Tanya was almost shouting. Pavel Alekseeve of his neck.
 “I’m sorry, my child. And who do you want to be? ”
 Tears began to sprinkle from Tanya’s eyes. Pavel Alekseevich could not bear this.
 “I want to be the bad g! ”
 “Have a chat with Ilya Iosifovich. He’s the phher. He’ll prove to you that everything is material. You, and me, the rats, and drosophila: it’s all one and the same. I’m not hy. I work lied science: breech births, double nuchal cords. . . I refuse to try to solve problems of global significance. As it is, half the country is already busy doing that. . . It’s an ation. Anyone who does anythonsibility. The majorle try to do nothing at all. . .”
 “I don’t want that konsibility! ” Angry tears were now flowing down Tanya’s face. She had expected sympathy and understanding from her father, but had found nothing of the sort in him. Pavel Alekseevroving gaze.
 “Then you should have stuck to playiano. Or replanting cactuses. Or, if you wish, do drafting. . . and don’t go into science. . .”
 “I’m not doing anything of the sort anymore. That’s it. I qulaced it in the sink.
 PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH WATCHED HER TENSED SPINE WITH the repugnant feelened to him before. Of course, he’d insulted, he’d hurt the girl, the old fool! Just as he’d done with Lenochka. . . Insulted, Tanya had collected her cup from the table in the very same slow and uncertain way. . .
 He grabbed her by her pointed shoulders and hugged her.
 “Tanya! Don’t turn an experiment into a tragedy.”
 The slender young woman so resembled her mother at that moment that Pavel Alekseevich’s heart wrenched. She turned her angry, tear-streamed face to him and said quietly, “You’re just the same as the rest. . . You don’t understand anything. . .”
 She walked out of the krofound dismay and bewilderment: what had he said that was so out of line, how had he offended his favorite little girl?
 Pavel Alekseevich sat down at the head of the enormous table and sank his smoothly shaved head in his hands. He reflected. . . There was a multulsion. But the stream flowed ossible. Where was the dividing line? How real was it? Havace each in their own way. Some cherose themselves. . .
 The majority of Pavel Alekseevich’s many acquaintances could not tolerate self-isolation, fearing more than anything else that they might remain alone, face-to-face with themselves, and for that reason they were willing to drink tea, chat, and do all kinds of work just not to remain alone. Dle. There was even a proverb: many. But people who throtective band, an alienation zone. . . What a paradox! The most severe ersonalities in different ways. One man absolutely has to have hale. How is he feeling? Another regards even a slightly too attentive look as an infringement on his freedom. . .
 “What a strange, singularly strange family we are,” Pavel Alekseevich reflected. “Perhaps because only two of us—Elena and Tanya—are connected by real blood ties. . . The rest of us came together through the whims of fate. What leasures. . . Elena is melancholy, Tanechka is rebelling who knows why. . . Each le secret. . .”
 In fact, Pavel Alekseevlanned to do some work today: to skim through the American journals and write a commentary on a dissertation that had been lying around for two weeks already. . . But his mood was ruined, and he had no desire to read someone’s son’s dissertation. He opened the door of the cupboard—the bottle was where eeled off the metal lid. . .
 “And I’m to blame for it all, old fool. I’ve hurt everyone: Elena, Tanya, Vasilisa. . .”
 22
 TANYA FLEW OUT OF THE HOUSE AND RAN ALMOST AS FAR as the Savelovsky traidated wooden counter they’d not yet burned and mountains of market trash—everything from rotten vegetables to broken glass.
 The sun blazed wresunset force. Both her tears and her rage had subsided. Tanya sat down alongside a shed. Nearby three boys of about age seven were playing cards. One of them had a cleft lles. They slammed their cards and cursed. Tanya felt awkward even looking in their direction. In the opposair of drunks. These unarts. Their gender was indeterminable. An empty bottle stood between them. They felt good. A gray loaf of bread and a pink cloud. They looked at Tanya and exchanged words.
 One of the  wine from a scruffy bag and winked. . .
 Theerson of the male gender.
 “Come on, I’ll pour you some,” one invited Tanya. Now it became clear that the second creature was a woman.
 Her face was pitted, and the shadow of an old bruise lay beneath one eye.
 Tanya stepped closer. The woman pa. Tanya took the glass and drank to the bottom. The woman chuckled with satisfaction.
 “Ain’t it the truth: he say you woun’t, but I say nawbody don’t say naw! ”
 Tanya felt lly. The werienced a sense of relief. . .
 “Kind of you, it’s very good wine.” Tanya thanked them, returning the glass.
 The drunken woman started.“Dawn’t you drink naw wine, girl! ”
 She spoke a dialect not from Moscow, with strong“aw” instead of “o.”
 “I don’t really dronded. The man, who had seemed good-natured at first, for some reason turned surly.
 “Yah, we know how you don’t drink. Chugged down the whole damn glass without chokin’.”
 “Pay naw ’tentulled out his bluish hand, tried to form it into a fist, but couldn’t—his swollen fingers would not bend and just stuck out to the sides—and thrust it under the woman’s nose. . .
 Wed him on the hand.
 “Aw, I’m scared now! ”
 “Watch out or I’ll teach you a lesson. . . ,” he threatened.
 “Here,” the woman pulled back in reconciliation and with nimble hand filled the dirty glass and handed it to the little man.
 “That’s more like it! ” He took the glass with his gnarled hand and drank. Then wty glass alongside the untouched food and turned to Tanya.
 “Whaddya sittin’ there for: go get some more.”
 Tanya obed.
 “Of what? ”
 “Of what! ” he teased. “Fagne! Get whatever you have enough money for. . . You know where to go? All the stores are closed; you need to go to the wooden house.”
 First Tanya bought a bottle of dry Gurdzhaani, but her choice turned out to be wrong, and the little man flayed his arms in indignation. They still drank it, though. Then, almost not makort wine, which turned out to be exactly right. Between the Gurdzhaan and chased them all off. They settled down not far away in a cozy blind corner of the courtyard overgrown with burdock between three crumbling structures for which the word“building” would have been a misnomer. . .
 Grace streamed down upon them. The couple no longer paarticular attention to Tanya. Over the entt for interjections, the little man uttered only three articulate words:“Summer’s good. Warm. . .”
 A lums, while the summer day lingered. Those.
 For all of her almost twenty years Tanya had never found herself lace, where work, cares, duty, and haste had been annulled. Thossessed such a wealth of freedom that they could share it with Tanya.
 The woman took off her shoes, egesting her filthy bare feet from the remains of her foot rags. Spreading her legs, she set her feet into the warm grass. It felt good. . . Then she took a couple of steps to the sants. Her backsected whiteness. The man commented serenely on the event:
 “Piss, bitch. . .”
 Then he got the urge himself. He stood up, rolled back the elastulled out his tiny tackle. The burdock shook under his healthy stream.
 Tanya felt good, better and better as her  right there in the shade of the soaked burdocks.
 She was awakened after dark by an acute attack of nausea. She did not immediately realize where she was. She tried to move. She got up on her knees. She vomited violently. Then she wiece of rough burdock leaf. The couple was gone. She had to make her way out of there. She moved and was once again overcome by nausea. Thart. Havtied her stomach, she set out across dark courtyards illuminated only by the weak light of windows. She crossed one, then another, then a third. A tram clanged not far away, and she headed toward its recognizable music. The street was familiar. Tikvinskaya. Quite close to her house.
 She felt better agaened to her. Oh, the vagrants. . . Nle free of all cares. . .
 How wonderfully sle life is! I did something to myself. . . Sn! Sn! No more. No more pregnant rats, hydrocephalus, or developillaries!
 A serene tranquair of vagrants. . .
 23
 ELENA GEORGIEVNA SAT ON A NARROW WOODEN BENCH behriest acquaintance. The service was already over. The worshersed. The cleaning woman clanged with her bucket. The metal scraping sound suited the church’s hollow silence. In the refectory the priests, the church elder, and the choirmaster were eating dinner, and the smell of fried onions reached Elena. The lire. . . Elena’s soul was peacefuland quiet. She came here for moments lecious. . . Perhaps she had asked Father Vladimir for a meeting for naught? Perhaps there was no need to tell anybody anything? And how would she put it? Yes, the world was fallart. But she herself understood perfectly well that linters of knowledge, memory, and life skills. . . She would have gone to a neurologressibly sublime as well. . . Was this a charm? A deception? How could she put it?
 The pring his mouth, buried under his mustache and beard, with a checkered handkerchief. . .
 “Now, my dear, at your service,” he said in an absolutely secular tone, as in the old days when he had worked at the Moscow Architectural Project office and Elena had occasionally done drafting work for him. “What problems are you having? ”
 ELENA DID NOT HAVE THE KIND OF PROBLEMS THAT COULD be discussed in such a vigorous, businesslike manner.
 “I’m having difficulties with my daughter. . . ,” she forced out of herself. She had not planned to talk to hoke about her. A feeling of betrayal clenched Elena. Tanya had not charged her to talk about her affairs with anyone, but there was no alternative, so she continued. “She’s a very capable gends her days and nights strolling about town, and she never says anything. . .”
 “How old is she, twenty? ” Father Vladathetically from under his one long eyebrow joined at the bridge of his nose. “It’s the same with mine. . . Kolya quit the institute, and Natochka left her husband. . . We raathetic results. . .”
 Elena Georger things. It was remarkably shisticated terms.
 Shortly after three Elena walked out into the street. The sun shone, and erienced the kind of wild terror a child feels at having lost its mother at a crowded train station. . . She stood for a moment and waass. . . Thse. Tht to it.
 “It’s a city,” she said to herself. “I’m in Moscow. I came here on the metro. . . Or was it a trolleybus. . . ? I’ll have to ask where the nearest metro station is. . . There’s a station near my building. I don’t remember what it’s called. It has colored stained-glass windows .. . I have a home. There’s a phone artment. . . The number is. . . I don’t remember. . . I should ask the man I was just talking to. . .”
 But she was unable to remember to whom she had just spoken and about what. . .
 A tall woman ty mirror of the world that had just been filled with color and various details, each of which had a title or a name. . . She set off slowly down the lane. And walked, and walked, past places that were unfamletely unrecognizable. She tried not to cross streets: that was too terrifying. When she tired, she sat down on a bench in some square. She wanted to ask the woman sronounced. Then someone familiar touched her shoulder.
 “Elena Georgievna? Has somethened? ”
 The voice was a woman’s, concerned. Elena never did remember who it was. Thed her with the key. For some reason it was already late in the evening. She could not understand where the day had gone. Elena sat down. . . Two other people were asleep at home—Pavel Alekseevich in his study, and Toma in the nursery. Alongsty vodka bottle. Toma slept without having washed her earth-stained hands or turning out the light. That evening Vasilisa did not return home. Neither did Tanya. . . but Elena did not notice.
 Part Two
 [Картинка: _1.jpg]
 1
 THE SAND, PICKED UP BY A STREAM OF AIR, RANG LIGHTLY as lants. A haze stretched across the horizon in every direction, and the sky held not a single suggestion of any light source. T again—over barely formed, low-lying hills. The sand slowly rolled from place to place, flowale earth barely changed.
 On one of the flat hills lay a woman, half-covered by the sand. Her eyes were closed, but her frinkled it in fine streams.
 “It’s probably all ren my eyes now,” the woman thought. Hesened them. The soft semleasant. She lay for a l on one elbow. Then sat up. The sand toured from her clothes. She examined the sleeveof her white nightshirt with the tiny green florets.
 “Brand-new, made in Pakistan. A present: I dolka-dot kerchief tied village-style under her chin. She smiled and flung it off. S, she tucked her knees under her chin:that felt good. . . light and easy. . .
 She stuck her hands under the hem of her nightshirt and felt the coarse scaliness of her legs. She ran her palms over her calves, and the sand fell off. The woman drew up her hem and was astonished by the sight of her legs: they were covered with rough cracks. Near the cracks the skink, scaly tubules. She rapped on them, and they fell off, exactly laint off an old mannequin. She took a certaosing new young skin inside. Her barticularly frightening: each of them was encrusted in a grayish-yellow layer from which the nail stuck out like an overgrown wooden mushroom.
 “Yuck, how disgusting! ” She rubbed the almost lectedly detached themselves, falling off and instantly blending into the sand. They revealed new pink toes—like those of an infant. A paeared from somewhere. They were so familiar. . . Of course, Grandmother had bought them and a dark-blue wool sweater for her mother at the Torgsin store in exchange for a gold chain and ring: shoes for her. . .
 Her hands, too, were covered with a dry, dusty crust. She rubbed them, releasing long, slender fingers, glove-smooth, without any knobs on the joints or dark raised veins. . .
 “How wonderful,” she thought. “I’m like new.”
 And none of thrised her in the least. She stood up and felt that she had grown taller. Remnants of old sked in sandy layers at her feet. She ran her hand over her face and hair: everything was her own, yet everything was changed. The sand crunched under her feet, and her heels sank into the sand. It was neither cold nor hot. It grew neither darker nor lighter: it was early dusk, and it seemed as if nothing here intended to change.
 “I’m all alone.” The thought ran through her head. Just then she felt a sles on its sides, brushed against her bare legs. One of the anied her everywhere. She bent over and stroked ine. The cat purred reciation. Then suddenly everything changed: the air around her turned out to be inhabited. It moved wer name to: the air is alive, and it is not indifferent to me. In fact, osed toward me. . .
 She inhaled it. It smelled of somethleasant, but inedible. Where t into her head from?
 She ascended a small hill and saw a multitude of similar tablelands.
 “Rather monotonous.” Then she set off forward, wlace, really—with no intended direction, wherever her eyes would lead her. The cat walked alongsaws sinking lightly into the dry sand.
 WALKING FELT GOOD. EFFORTLESS. SHE WAS YOUNG AND light. Everythared herself for so long. Nothremonitions. All of the phys, in the enormity of her visual horizons, and in the marvelous harmony of her body with the world stretched out around her.
 “How are they doing back there? ” she thought, but “there” was bare and deserted. “Okay, so I don’t need to know,” she agreed wictures. “They” also could not be made out as individuals. . .
 She held something in her hand. She looked: it was a black lace headscarf, gathered along the seams and as rigid as if new. She spread attern was familiar—not quite bells, not quite flowers, little bells braided together with sinuous whiskers. A memory seemed to break through from somewhere, as if through an invisible wall, and the woman smiled: at last she could orient herself. . . This was the headscarf she had searched for long ago when her grandmother had died. Grandmother had insisted on being buried in this headscarf, but she had hidden it so well that no one had been able to find it. So they buried her without it, covering her head with a white kerchief. . . She flung the headscarf on her head and with a familiar gesture tied it at the back of her neck.
 She walked for a long terienced no fatigue, she suddenly felt terribly bored. She noteared. And then she saw some people—come from who knew where—sfire. Its transparent white-blue flame was barely visible, but streams of air flowed visibly around it.
 She approached them. A tall, thot gleaming together with his smile, which was directed at her.
 “We have a Newling,” he said welcomingly. “Come here. Come. We’ve been expecting you.”
 The people around the fire stirred, making room for her. She stepped closer and sat down on the sand. The Judean stood alongside her, smiling like an old acquaintance. She felt awkward, because she could not remember where she had seen him before. He placed his hand on her head, chanting:
 “That’s good, that’s good. . . Newling. . .”
 And she understood that Newling was her name now. He was the Judean. The ten or so people sitting around the fire were men and women. Some also had fam of memory and connect it to the fabric of existence had been so futile that she just waved them off as a function of habit.“They can’t remember either,” the Newling guessed, noticing with what breathless attention a smooth-shaven man sitting Asian-style slightly off to the side watched her. There were also two dogs and a strange animal the woman had never seen before.
 “Just sit, sit and rest,” said the Judean. Somethlace alongside the fire. More than anything else it seemed as if they were sunbathing. . . at twfire. . . An enormous bulky woman wrapped head to foot alms facing outward. A tall elderly woman ressed toward the fire. . . Besleasant. . . One of the dogs rolled over on osing its stomach, covered with thin white fur. The mutt’s mug had bliss written all over it. The second dog, a shaggy sheepdog, sat waws crossed in front of itself, exactly like a human being.
 They sat for a while in silence. Then the Judean extended hfire, making a gesture as if he were squeezing something in his hand, and the flame went out. In place of the burnowder that blended with the sand before her very eyes.
 The people stood up and shook the sand from their clothes. The Judean walked ahead, the others strung out airs or one by one behind him. The Newlose and concentration. . . Last er leaning on a stick. Both his stick and his foot sank in the sand, yet although he was last, he did not lag behind. . .
 They had already moved rather far off  alongside Skinhead.
 “That’s good,” he said.
 2
 TIME HERE WAS MARKED, AS THE NEWLING SUBSEQUENTLY noted, not by the alternatfire and a sequence of events that struck the Newling as one stranger than the other. But nobody requating in them. She did not always understand the essence of the events, but she never was forced to do anything against her will. Somets would occur just when she would begin to think that it would not be a bad idea to have a rest.
 She long ago had come to realale fire.
 The locale was monotonous, gradually creatression that their seeming orientation toward some goal merely masked the fact that they were moving in a circle.
 Yes, somethlace or the quite tangible tiny grains of sand that sometimes got in her eyes and irritated her tear glands.
 One time the Judean sat down beside her and laid his hand on her shoulder. He had a habit, she noted, of touching his fellow travelers—on the head, the shoulder, or on the forehead sometimes. . .
 “Do you want to ask me a question? ”
 “I do. . . Is there some other system of coordlace? ”
 He looked at her wrise.
 “It’s completely different.”
 “Not three-dimensional, that is? ”
 “It’s mults, the wind stirring what remained of the gray hairs that grew just above his ears and on the back of his head beneath his bare crown.
 “Does that mean that each of us ace with its own set of coordinates? ”
 “Not everyone. I know where you are and that fellow over there. . .” The Judean pointed to Skinhead. “But you two do not yet fall wace. . . But that’s not final. In these parts nothing is final. Everytheed. . .”
 “Ah-ha, that means time exists. . .”
 “And what did you think? Time exists, but not just one. There are several tersonal, abstract, accentuated, reverse, and many, many others. . .” He stood up. “Nice talking to you. . .”
 And walked off. The Newling sat, absorbing the rays of light with her body and filling with strength. That sickly fire nourished them all. . . The deserted place, so osed at the very beginning. What the Judean had said about time was rather enigmatic, but she nonetheless had the sense that she had known about this but had forgotten. That thought almost burned her leasant.
 The Newle. . .“Once I knew many other thle—but I’ve forgotten it all; I can’t remember anything. Perhaps I’ve fallen out of the realm of tlace? ” She closed her eyes, because all that remaleasure ofthe warmth and their eternal march through the fine sand. . .
 Some of the travelers were so locked sychiatric clinic. They fulfilled the Judean’s infrequent orders lethargically at best, while he treated them like children—tenderly and with a firm hand. The majority of them recognized each other by sight, although they interacted little and only reluctantly. But there were some who were mutually dosed toward each other, and they would sit around the fire talking quietly among themselves.
 New faces occasear. Usually they deared unnoticed. Only one woman—gray and dresence. Once laced the two stuffed bags at his feet, bowed, and kissed his hand.
 He watted her comradely and roughly on the shoulder, and, extinguishing his smile, growled,“Well, go, go. . . They’re waiting for you. . . You’re a clever girl, go, and don’t be afraid of anything. . .”
 Those who bothered to ra of discarded bags and a slowly diminishing smooth funnel of fading movement in the air. The mongrel grew agward. . . The second dog—the baw. . .
 Soon they were all walkoured down on them a burden none of them needed. . .
 Shortly thereafter, at theeared—a long-haired young man. Up to th into the sand. He carr. Hletely blank. There were at least three tht flying over him now and again. . . The anled his hair and blew under his clothes—first too hot then too cold—nastily and annoyingly demanding, begging, whining. . . Besides these more or less distinct sensations, of which he was consciously aware, he also had the vague feeling of some enormous loss. The loss by far surpassed everytharison with what he had lost. But what exactly he had lost he did not know.
 He grew ted onto the sand, shook his head, and white sand fell from his hair. He placed the little suitcase under his head. The sand crunched between hricked him under his clothes. From somewhere off to the rward, wobbled in the distance, and started to move toward him. Longhair felt a fatigued irritation and said under his breath,“Get lost, will you! ”
 The vortex shuddered and stopped. Then the fellow decowers. Thression he had had of late. Wt a layer of sand off the suitcase and closed his eyes. You couldn’t say he had fallen asleep: rather, he had fallen sy. While he was still conscious, he admonished himself: I do not want to come here anymore, no more coming back here. . . Someted. He had experience with this sort of thing.
 When he opened ht that his neck was stiff from the rigid corner of the bizarre object underneath his head. He woorly drawn. One of them was a bile of dry stalks. He extended h. The fire ignited of its own, without matches or a lighter. Thlaces like this where water, fire, and wind merely laughed at the ambitions of small creatures who thought that with the flimsy reins of cause and effect they had tamed everything on earth. . .
 That Jew playing with fire is the leader here, Longhair guessed.
 The Judean approached htiveness:
 “You’ll hardly need that tharts.”
 “I can’t just throw it out! ” Longhair shrugged.
 “Naturally. . .”
 “What’s inside it? ” The question had occurred to Longhair for the first time. “What’s so ortant inside it that I’m hauling it around? ”
 “Open it and look,” the Judean advised.
 Longhair stared in amazement at his interlocutor: why hadn’t that occurred to him earlier? But it hadn’t. . . In part thly just to get a glass of water, but your body won’t obey you, and you can’t budge a single muscle. . .
 The ls, and Longhair could not figure out at first how they worked. As he pondered the mechanened. It was not a suitcase, but a case for an object of inconceivable beauty. The very srecious metal—neither warm gold nor cold silver, but soft and luminiferous. The elongated letters engraved hered the small letters immediately. He whered the word, and it was sweet in his mouth. . . Then he touched the wooden mouthpiece with his fingers. The wood was matte and tender as a maiden’s skin. Its curve was so acutely feminine that Longhair was abashed, as if he had inadvertently caught sight of a naked woman.
 “What a wonderful. . .” He faltered, looking for a word:toy, machine, thing? Rejecteated with a declarative intonation:“How wonderful! ”
 He had the urge to do something with it, but he did not know what. . . He tore off the talaid wool shirt, and, breathing warm air on the flared golden surface, he gently stroked it with the red-and-green rag.
 Now he was walkleasant touch. . . It seemed as though tht trying to touch it. Longhaed to the side in fright. At rest stops Longhaocket of his jeans and lovingly rub the metal tube all the while they sat.
 Sometimes he caught the gaze of the tall lean woman with the black headscarf over her voluminous hair. He would sminess, love until the grave, and generally everything you would ever want. . . But her face, for all its loveliness, seemed to him much too distracted. . .
 3
 THEY MOUNTED THE NEXT LITTLE HILL. THE JUDEAN stopped, looked for a long time at the earth beneath his feet, then sat down and began to rake the sand with his hands. There laces. From unctured chest hung some sort of dark-blue string. The Judean pressed hlaced his fingers on its barely distinguishable eyes, then scattered a handful of sand over the doll’s face. All the others also threw handfuls of sand, then silently crowded together in a cluster.
 “Perhaps we should try anyway? ” Skinhead asked the Judean.
 “A waste of time. There’s no way,” the Judean objected.
 “We should at least try. There are a lot of us. Maybe we’ll manage,” Skinhead insisted.
 “What do you say, Sister? ” He addressed the thefully. Sister, not lifting her cowl, shook her head with regret: “It’s not ready yet, I think.”
 The Newling wanted very much to take another look at this human manikin, but the sand had already covered its clumsy figure.
 “What do you say? ” the Judean unexpectedly addressed the Newling.
 “I would d of a cold hill.
 “Are you willing to carry it? ” He laughed, but his laughter was friendly and not malicious.
 “You ought to be ashamed,” Skroached him. “Your jokes, as always, are idiotic. . .”
 “All right, all right. Here, aim your flashlight and take a look.” The Judean sat down and quickly, almost like a dog, began to dig away the dry sand. . . “But keep in mind, if it doesn’t work, it will hang on you.”
 Skinhead looked aside aloofly and grumbled:“And what’s the volvox for then? Ultossible. . . Just a bit.”
 St. The Newling sat down alongside the Judean and began to dig the earth near Manikin’s feet. Skinhead dug the sand near the head. . .
 The legs, whaint exactly like those the Newling had had not long ago. . .
 She scraped away the paint. Under ink skin the Newling had discovered under her worn shell. Sker.
 “Let me warm  a bit.” The Judean gently moved Skinhead to the side.
 “That’s a good idea,” Skinhead nodded. “Warrior, gather some tinder. . .”
 The man eared with several dry branches, which he fashioned into a vertical stack. The Judean approached, extended hs, and the branches ignited with a bluish-white flame. They dug out the manikin. It was crude, oorly outlined, its arms and legs clumsily fashioned. Its sex was very dortionately large. The figure emitted not the slightest signs of life.
 “Volvox,” Skarticular.
 The Judean, havated the manikin’s neck and touched its stomach, frowned: “The material hasn’t set. It’s hopeless. . . We’ll all lose a stage and achieve nothing.”
 Sking me from doing my job. I’m a doctor, after all. . . I’m supposed to do everythatient.”
 The Judean laughed and brusquely pushed aside Skinhead with a fist to his stomach:“Fool! I told you: doctors are fallen priests. You spent your whole lracticing secular medicine and now you want to foist it on us here.”
 “You’re the fool,” Skro forma. “You belrofessional duty. You’ve dumped all your problems on the shoulders of your Lord God. . . When it comes down to it, volvox is nothing more than an exercise in energy. . .”
 “Okay, okay, I don’t object,” agreed the Judean wresent here. . .
 The Newl, and grains of sand were striking her lightly in the cheeks and forehead and burying themselves in her hair. The wrickly leaves, fragile vegetative threads, and dry moss. The fire burned, inclining slightly toward the ground, but with no intention of dying out.
 The human manen. Skassed it to Warrior standing nearby. Having gone full circle, the ball returned to Skinhead. Everyone held the thread with two hands. To the rer. The wossible to determine as it blew from all sides and carried more and more vegetative rubbish. They all stood mot, while at their feet, alongside the fluttering flame, the crude manikin lay motionless. The Judean raening was covered over, forming the semblance of an ancient hut. The Newling sensed that her breathing was inconsonant with that of all the others, and she held her breath in order to join their common rhythm. Havlayed a certain discernable resistance to their common effort, to what might even have been called work. A very strong pulsatresence. The two strongest engines were Skinhead’s and the Judean’s.
 The wind continued to rise, and standing was difficult, but the thread, which had seemed to be so flimsy, was durable, and it too conducted a flow of energy. The thread began to glow slended in the air. The manikin lying on the ground trembled, shuddered, and rose slightly off the ground.
 “There, it’s working.” She heard Skinhead’s satisfied voice. “Now we just need to breathe on it real hard.”
 They blew wraise. . .
 The stuffed manenis became obviously erect. The manhere started to settle, and soon they touched down on the earth. The vegetatarent—head, and coughed.
 “Well? Is anythening? ” the Judean asked.
 “The lungs are breathonded.
 “Not a lot, but better than nothing,” smirked the Judean.
 Together the Judean and Skinhead dragged Manikin closer to the flame. It had become softer and now more resembled a human be than a tailor’s dummy.
 The Newled to the ground. Look. The Judean threw powdered fuel from a matchbox into the fire, which made the flame glow dark blue and emit its nourishing light even more mightily. . .
 4
 THE QUALITY OF THE AIR VARIED: SOMETIMES IT WAS LIGHT, dry, and“well-dosed,” as the Newling referred to it, and sometimes it grew heavy, dense, and seemingly filled with a dark moisture. When that happened, they would all move more slowly and tire more quickly. The weck at you from the side, or breathe down your neck. The light, however, always remained the same, and this more than anything else created the sensation of tiresome monotony.
 “Te? ” the Judean quietly asked Skinhead. The Newlrotected, did not turn her head, although she overheard the quiet remark.
 “Got anythose? ” Skonded offhandedly.
 “A small detour off the main route? Any objections? ”
 “That’s news to me: you mean there’s a route? And I thought that we were stompose.” Skinhead smirked. He had long ago troach of either total darkness or sunrise. . . “Ican tolerate the landscape: a desert like any other. . . If only there were sun. . .”
 “Let’s go then.” The Judean examined the cohort dozing near the fire and searched with his eyes for the Newling. She was alongside them. “We’ll take the Newling with us.”
 The Newling smiled with gratitude.
 “And the others? ” Sk, moved by a noble urge for fairness, or at least equality. . .
 The Judean laughed:“What do they. . . We’re not handackages at the union office. . . Trust me, dragging the rest of them along is senseless.”
 Skinhead shrugged his shoulders.
 “Whatever you say. . .”
 “Let’s go for a walk. . . ,” he beckoned to the Newl and shook out her clothes.
 THE THREE OF THEM WALKED THROUGH CRUNCHING SAND. Droaching. . .
 The column glowed and filled with a metallic sheen. Then, there they were, standhosed into a rounded wall of translucent light metal. . .
 “There,” saeared inside it. He pressed ws of his fingers.
 “I know, I know how it’s done; I’ve already seen this somewhere before,” the Newling rejoiced inwardly.
 There, beyond the door, the light was solid as a column, strong and dense, almost like water. They entered. The door, of course, deared, as if it had dissolved behind their backs.
 Inside it was a bright, sunny day. Morning, but not early. The beginning of summer. A wall of huge subtropical trees stood not any which way, but arranged in order. The Newlle formula underlying their arrangement, and if you could figure it out, you would understand the message they contained in themselves and for themselves, but which held meaning for others as well. The message was also encoded ly stores. . .
 The Newlleasure.
 “How happy her eyes are now,” thought Skle’s individual organs. . . Now his own eyes exulted, transmitting their joy to the rest of his body.
 A young woman sroached him, and they kissed each other heartily.
 “He knows absolutely everybody,” mused Skinhead. He and the Newling stood at a short distance so as not to interfere with their meeting.
 “Landscape architecture was what I dreamed of. . . I wasn’t able to floma thesis left to write. But, see, I learned to do ussycat. “These two are constantly arguing with each other; they just can’t learn to get along. I keep having to mediate.”
 Her face was attractturned nose was wide and indented, her mouth large; her eyes were enormous, gray, each of them double-outlined with black—once around the iris, and a second time by thick black eyelashes under broad, masculine brows.
 “Let me show you, let me show you,” she said, addressing Skinhead and the Newling. “My name is Katya.”
 The Newling noticed that Katya wore a man’s sleeveless undershirt, the kind boxers wear in the ring, and the undershirt stretched over large young breasts. A multistring coral necklace covered her entire neck. . . Skraclavicular fossa down. . .
 “I get the best results wointed to the two trees turned away from each other. “And these cryptomeria are my favorites. . . Maybe you remember that shy? A yellow narcassionate love; a forget-me-not—fidelity to the grave. . .” She smaces in between. “Well, the funniest thing is that it’s all more or less true. . . So you need to plant them so as not to mix the messages they carry. . . This garden is for nameless children.”
 Skinhead and the Newling exchanged glances: what nameless children?
 The Judean, who walked slightly off to the side, mumbled under his breath,“You could have figured that out yourself, without any hints. . . Yours are here too. . .”
 The path of cryptomeria led downward toward the water. No water was vromised water, the same smell that animals can sense dozens of miles away, the smell that leads them to watering holes. . .
 The lake was quite small, round, and seemed slightly convex. Its blue water rarkled.
 “Hard to look at? ” Katya surmised. “At first my eyes hurt too, until they got accustomed to it. You need to look a little bit off to the side, not straight on. Shall we take a closer look? ” The last question was addressed to the Judean.
 He nodded. Katya ascended an airy little footbridge that hung in an arc over the lake. She lay down on her stomach and lowered both her arms into the water. Flappeared to be made of glass. It sparkled. Katya slid the ingot of light, water, and blueness into Skinhead’s hands. He took ered: “A child. . .”
 The Newling did not see any child. The Judean crouched down on the footbreak solemnly, as if at a meeting.
 “It was born completely healthy, of healthy and handsome parents, and died a week later of an infection. The little boy cried and suffered. Hare his child’s life. But that tleasure with another man’s wife, even if her breasts were like two lambs and her hair like a herd of goats descending from the Mount ofGilead. . . And so on. . . He had even sent the beauty’s husband to hossess yet one more woman, when he had more than enough of his own. . . Well? ”
 “No, I don’t know,” Skinhead shook his head.
 “Hello! . . . Thtized. Then the couple had another baby. That one survived. They named him Solomon.”
 Skinhead chuckled:“How do you know? You’ve never read the Bible in your life.”
 “I have. Only at that toint. But I’m a Jew, you see. And Jews were given the Bible sort of by default. It’s a part of us, and we’re a part of it. Even if we don’t want it that way. And even if you don’t want it that way. . . Therefore, when resented to me at one critical moment, it turned out that it and I were one. Regardless of the fact that the world has never known anyone more here. It was Skinhead’s turn to mumble.
 “My friend, what are you saying? That thle of Jerusalem? That it’s two thousand seven hundred years old? ”
 “But it knows no time, only being,” noted Katya, about whom they had forgotten.
 “Okay, assume that’s true. But what about the others? Who are the others? ” Skhere in Katya’s hands. She walked to the middle of the footbridge, got down on her knees, arched catlike, and lowered the mysterious creature into the infant hatchery. Then she waved with her hand, beckoning them all onto the bridge.
 The lake was full of—verheres. The Newlheres. . .
 “Of course, that’s how osed to be.” The Newling grew excited. She could not have explaosed to be.
 “The unborn children, the aborted ones, are here too. . . Sometlained matter-of-factly. “Speakting to fish out something that obviously did not want to be fished out.
 “You and I used to be good at phted him.
 “No, no. I was more interested in history.”
 “Never mind. Remember Leibnitz’s monads? It’s very similar, you have to admit. And Saint Augustine was on the right track. . . Well, I won’t even mention the Cabalists. For all the intolerableness of their method, they figured out a lot. . .” He suddenly smirked. “What was that your Fedor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky used to say about a child’s tears? That comment he made to the Almighty about not having enough humanity. . .”
 The Newled still. The sphere rocked slalm.
 “He’s afray smile. “It’s very froint. . . They’re going to do work. Some to commit great deeds, some—vileness. . . But this one here is very good. . .”
 “Are there bad ones? ” the Newling wondered.
 Katya sighed.
 “Yes, they’re all different. There are frightened ones, and traumatized ones. . . And the more terror they’ve endured, the more evil they do. . .”
 That sounded convecially since the Newling once again got the sense that she herself knew something about all this.
 “Take it,” said the Judean to Skinhead.
 Skinhead felt that he too wanted to hold the creature in his hands. Wressed against Katya’s hand. Katya turned her palm so that the sphere lay firmly in Skinhead’s hand. Judging by its weight and the sensation of warmth, disquiet, and trustfulness, this was a child. Undoubtedly a boy.
 “Give it your blessing,” said the Judean.
 “That’s up your Jewish line, not mine. I don’t know anythromised to become an infant.
 “It’s no stranger to you. Give it to me. . . If you don’t want to give it your blessing, don’t. Just wish that it becomes a good doctor.”
 “Now you’re talking,” agreed Skinhead. “So be it.”
 The sphere lward. . . unteared, leaving behind only the sound of the burst film and carrying away in the core of its essence the recollection of having overcome the boundary between two environments. . .
 5
 SKINHEAD WAS HAVING A DIFFICULT TIME NOW. MANIKIN barely moved, stopp on its feet, and then Skinhead would have to fling it over his shoulder like a sack and haul it on his back, which cost him no small effort. The Judean offered to help several thed him off.
 “It seems to me that you did your share of hauling back then.” And he lugged on. Thearently because of Manikin. After bathing in the sun for a while, it revived a bit and even walked on its own for a time. Once, when they were alongserly, its rudimentary eyebrows were barely traced on, and the eyes beneath them were weak-sighted. The Judean caught her gaze and saresentable on our own. We’ll have to get help from above.”
 Skted to raise one of its eyelids, which were stuck shut, but could not.
 “Yes, probably,” Skinhead agreed thoroughly morosely.
 “We’ll have to take a detour.” The Judean drew a sweeping sign in the air.
 They set off, as always, yto see even this sickly greenery. The hills grew into foothills.
 When eared over one of the rises. In theed in their tracks. It had been so long sressed them more.
 The Judean walked confart of their journey. Even Ler had overtaken him.
 Closer up, the shed more resembled some antiquated structure. The doors were h. Enterointed barracks, with dozens of beds instead of barracks’ bunks, standing headboard to the wall and covered with something white—either coarse sheets or thin blankets. The left wall was occup by a wooden table. In the left wall were two doors: one wing dotted-line streams of water. . .
 With amazement Newling studied the universally understood door signs. Only now it dawned on her that it had been a long time since she had washed or visited a toilet, even to urinate. How could letely forgotten about these basic human needs? She ushed the door of the WC. There was a white toilet, a sink, and a terry-cloth towel hanging on a metal hook. It also smelled strongly of soap.
 “How many things have I forgotten! ” she thought with horror and sat down on the toilet. The whole procedure went off wer at her service. She flushed, went over to the sink, and searched with her eyes for a mirror. There was none. But there should be one. She turned the old-fashioned brass handle, and water flowed out. She splashed her hands in the hard stream. The water was so strong and so heavy, and the sensatowerful that tears trickled from Newling’s eyes.
 “How could I have gone all this time and never thought of water or of the fact that I’m a human being, who requires a toilet from time to time? Or about water, which is absolutely essential, yet, it turns out, one can do without? It never even occurred to me! ”
 She scooped a handful of water. It seemed heavy. She lowered her face into it: bliss. . . She splashed herself again and again. How good it would be to take a shower. . .
 Newling left the lavatory. Skinhead had already laid out Manikin on one of the beds, and it moved its hands slightly. The others stood at the table, obviously confused. The Judean said something to them that she did not hear at first.
 “. . . we’ll spend the night. We haven’t slept for a long t here.”
 Newling looked around: now she wanted to go to the shower room. But there was no shower room anymore. In addition, the WC was gone too. Now lace where there had been two doors there was nothing at all. An empty wall. She sat down in confusion on the nearest bed.
 “I have to ask. I wered in her ear.
 “I’ll explain later. It was an oversart of the administration. There’s not supposed to be a shower or a toilet in here. A sled smile.
 Why is his face so familiar? Maybe because we’ve been walking together for so long. . . She felt that she was fall. No sooner had she stretched out on the feared. “How nice” was the last thing she managed to think. . .
 In the place where she was there were talklot was unraveling, of which she seemed to be the star. Carefully laleasant. She fortant than life itself.
 She opened her eyes. Her back, legs, arms, and the back of her head felt hard and white. Her body felt good:  inside their muscles, in the bare heels of her feet touching against the sheet. Her heart delot just above her stomach. She felt even better than she had near the campfire. But she den her eyes. Famoint beyond the reaches of her memory.
 “I’m completely unprepared,” said one. That was Skinhead. “I don’t know anything. What’s more, somethening all the time.”
 “Nothredictable here. It’s always an rovisation,” answered the Judean. “When we dragged Manikin here, I didn’t know that everyone was going to get worked on. Everyone’s moved to the next level. Each to his own.”
 “Are you sure you have to leave? ”
 “Yes, I’ve finished everything here.”
 “Right away? ” Skointed.
 “In a little bit.” There was the sound of glass ringing, as if glasses had been clinked.
 “All right. So as the curtas tell me everything about Ilya Iosifovich,” Skinhead asked.
 The Judean chuckled.
 “Doctor, you’re a smart man and you made the diagnosis yourself long ago: ‘a good head on a fool’s shoulders.’”
 “I’ve never been interested in climbing administrative ladders. You know that’s not my sin. But why are so many then to you? I say that without malice or envy.”
 “I know that. You see, great strength can accumulate through honest errors. And when released, the effect is meteoric. That’s how I took off. Although the explosainful, even if instantaneous. You’ve always stood closer to intrinsic truths. What did they used to say: ‘the truth is concrete’? ” They both laughed. “Your path is slow, but true. Do you think being a saint is easy? ”
 Skinhead smirked:“Who here is a saint? ”
 “What do you mean who? ” the Judean answered lete seriousness. “You and I, and all the others. . .”
 “What are you saying? I, a nonbeliever, and Manikin, and the monstrous Fat Lady? I don’t understand.”
 “You’re too much in a hurry. Don’t rush. Remember how Ilya Iosifovich used to work like a madman, how it always seemed to him that just a bit more, just try a little harder, and he’d get the Nobel Prize for saving humankind? Now, as you see, I’m not rushing anywhere. You’ll figure it out eventually. . . The amazing thing is that I had read everything. I knew everything. The necessary and the sufficient. . . Through a glass darkly. Never to the bottom, always in a hurry.”
 Something tinkled again.
 “They’re deflicable excitement and a certain awkwardness. She even wanted to contrresence known, but could not. Her body was as if switched off—she could not move a finger or use her voice. . .
 “Yes,” sighed Skinhead. “There’s no reason for me to hurry. Especially now when she’s here. . . Everything is so incredible.”
 “And unpredictable? ” his interlocutor remarked with a certain acrimony.
 “And that too. . . What strange medicine. . . Methodologically it’s very much like ours. . . They even do sutures the way we do: double surgical knots. . . Even the needle, I thought, looked round. . .”
 “And what did you think? The Spasokukotsky method of surganation, Bekhterev mixture. . . All our techniques came from there. . .”
 “What’s amazarately with the bone tissue, the blood vessels, and the nerves. . . I’m not sure I took it all in.”
 “You can be sure you didn’t. Not all at once. All right, it’s time. One more, and we’re off. You’ll see me off.”
 They distinctly clinked glasses.
 “And what about them? Are we going to leave them here like this? ” Skinhead was concerned.
 “Doctor, Doctor,” laughed the Judean. “Let them rest. Get the.”
 The Newl a bit. She  in which the air fluttered not as usual, but musically, with a light radiance that coincided with the music. The vision nurtured and quenched her like food and water. . .
 6
 THE ROAD LED DOWNWARD, WINDING AMONG THE HILLS. They walked wloring song.
 They d. The usual breeze blew, but er, and sweet glue. . .
 The Judean walked sling with his bandy legs on the outer side of his foot. Skinhead followed, his shoulders lowered and his relaxed hands in loose fists, like those of an old boxer. Both of them felt that thletely different, and this differentness—for the moment still unqualifiable—continued to mount. They both understood sle there was no distinguishing direction. Here, though, the East soon made ale and light-filled edge of the sky.
 The road somehow accelerated on er. The place gradually acqule. The road was lined on both sides with large deciduous trees that resembled lindens, but with very tiny leaves. The trees, whlace its quality of being inhabited. On the rath. A board wost. They turned to the right.
 The path quorch. The porch had recently been remodeled widated. Curly low grass grew along both slot. . .” He bent down and ran halm along the grass and smiled: his eyes had not deceived him; it felt exactly the same. . .
 “I thorch. They wed rug. They found themselves. An old man dressed ers.
 “That’s right. Nothing is allowed. Whatever you have on you ed.
 “That’s not an unauthorrayer of absolution,” the monk insisted.
 “Sh. . . How many teat myself! ” The watchman  hat grew angry. “Look at this, old man! ” The watchman opened the re of a crooked heart, followed, finally, by books, one after the next. They were all New Testaments—from antiquated ones dog-eared from hundreds of years of reading to new trilingual ones, the kind they have in hotels. . .
 “You see, these are all unauthorized items. . . People keep bringing them, and bringing them. . . So, you see, give me that ribbon of yours and go on through. . .”
 The monk placed h a black New Testament and walked dejectedly through the entrance.
 The Judean and Skroached the Cerberuses. The one asses. The Judean flung out his arms.
 “Are you guys kidding? Passes were done away with long ago. . .”
 “Maybe where you live they were done away with, but not here. Our administration demands we check. All k around here. . .”
 Skeasants, and one of them had a very familiar face. He looked at him closely and recognized him: it was Kuroedov, the son of a bitch. He had worked as a guard at the clinic for many years. A cantankerous former KGB watchdog. . .
 “Don’t bother, Ilya. Let’s go. What are you staring at, Kuroedov? ” Skast the men through the door.
 Kuroedov looked at Sked and started waving his arms gleefully.“Holy Fathers! It’s him! It’s him! ”
 “You fool! ” barked Skrings slammed behind them with a resounding boom. . .
 There was no structure behind the door. It was a huge amphitheater with a round arena barely visible down below. The two wayfarers stood at the outsed stairless downward to the arena at the bottom. At fart, at a great distance from each other.
 “We need to go down,” uttered the Judean, not quite confidently. They had descended qued Skinhead. “I think this is good enough.”
 They turned art from each other.
 “Sit here,” the Judean offered.
 Skinhead sat down.
 “Can you see? ”
 In the center of the arena Skhere.”
 “Try sitting over there,” the Judean requested, and Skinhead moved down a row and made himself comfortable on the stone bench. He could see the same thness.
 “It’s worse from here.” Skinhead blinked.
 The Judean nodded osed that he climb several rows higher. But from there all he could see was a whitish fog.
 “You see, Doctor, I wasn’t wrong: thlace. “Just what the doctor ordered.”
 “Your jokes are idiotic,” Skinhead sniffed. “Can you explain to me just what kind of a show this is. . .”
 The Judean did not sit down, but stood alongside him, his hands on Skinhead’s shoulders.
 “This is where you belong. For now.”
 “And those sitting further down can see better? ” Skinhead inquired.
 “They don’t see better, they see more. It’s a particular kind of accommodation. What you see depends on your place, whends on you. But don’t let that get to you. They’ve spent more time studying.” The remark sounded consolatory.
 “Studying what? ” Skinhead shot back.
 “It. Being yourself.” He looked at the sky. Even from here, from the depths of the ampharent that the eastern side of the sky was filling with light.
 “Sometimes you say intolerably banal things,” Skinhead said, frowning. “Better you should tell me how not to be oneself.”
 “Everyone has to be born again. To give birth to himself again. . . Enough. You’ll figure it out.” He sighed bitterly. “So, now you and I will say good-bye.”
 “Forever? ”
 “I don’t know. I think not. . .”
 “Listen,” said Skinhead, quashing the amicably romantic tone. “So what am I supposed to do with all those. . . wer, and Fat Lady. . . I have a hard time imagining what I can do for them. . .”
 “You know, you’ve got the rroach. I think you’ll manage. Put your fareme Intelligence. It won’t let you down.” The Judean smirked, and his smirk suddenly wounded Skinhead.
 “Are you laughing, Ilya? ”
 “That part of Ilya that sts. After all, reme Intelligence just as I did. So follow it.”
 Skinhead wanted to object, but there came a sound, at first not very loud, but alarming. It was the sound of a road. It reached hiercing his entire being. The sound contained a voice that announced very distinctly:“Are you ready? Are you ready? ”
 At the same time it was clear that someone else, not he, needed to ready himself. The sound was the sound of a trumpet. . .
 The Judean leaned over and krecisely him. . . Suddenly he stopped, returned, and rummaged hastockets. He pulled out something that looked either like a small box or a large bug and stuck it in Skinhead’s hand.
 “I almost forgot. It’s a lighter. That stalm of your hand. Take it easy! Everything will be okay! Very okay! ”
 He ran back down, skoor hair flew behind him. An. . .
 The sphere splheres. The Judean where shut with a metallic click.
 The sound of the trumpet—ple times over—mounted until the moment the metallic click was heard. Then the trumpet abated, and a weak electr slightly. The here.
 “He’ll burn up. . . It’s the end.” Skinhead was horrified.
 The buzzhere became cloudy and translucent. As if it were cooling down. . . It opened.
 Out of the sphere emerged the Judean. Hile of books. But there were no books. It seemed as if there was nothing at all.
 “It burned up. It all burned up.” Skrison work, as well as all his noble deeds, which had always caused those around him so much suffering. . .
 The Judean ralate on it. The plate bore a word that Skite the distance between them.
 INTENTIONS read the word on the plate.
 “Lord, God,” Skaved with them? . . . Can our intentions really acquit us? ”
 The arena swayed, and the coolhere, and the edge of the brightening sky—all of it shifted to the side, like the shadow of a cloud. . . Once again they were walking single file through the gray sandy desert, and their legs sank into the sand, and the weak breeze carried bits of sand that it cast in their faces. . . Up ahead marched Sking. . .
 7
 AFTER THEIR NIGHT IN THE SHED EVERYONE HAD CHANGED slightly. Most appreciably—Manikin. It was no longer stattern, and while its eyes still looked out blankly, they no longer seemed blind.
 “Larticularly thoroughly,” Skinhead noted to himself. “They’re good at plastic surgery, no denying it. . . And they made a leg for Llant. It looks like they formed new bone tissue and fashioned the fibula and the tibia, then grafted the nerves and muscle tissue. . . Fat Lady has become even fatter. Sarent; the light shines through her fingers. . . Actually, everybody has changed except the Newling. . .”
 He watched surreptoured the sand from them, then ran her marvelous hands (with a slight scar on the left one, between the middle and ring finger where a fishhook had lodged itself in her childhood) along her narrow long feet (she’d always been embarrassed by her large shoe size), and brushed off the grains of sand. Then she pulled off the black lace headscarf and loosened her thringy locks—like hair accustomed to long years of tight braiding; she shook out the sand. . .
 Manut in charge of them? . . . Who was he, anyway? Just like them, brought there from who knew where or why, confused and lonely. . .
 Sklay signs of alarm, which was out of character for it. It would look over aws. At one po needle at its face.
 The fierced Manikin’s forehead, and it fell to the ground with a loud scream. The seoon—where had it come from? —in its mouth, elevating its head on his knees so that its stone-hard skull did not beat against the ground. They had no medicine. If only he had about fhenobarbital. . .
 Following this first seizure Manikin’s life changed, becoming horrible and considerably more conscious. It was now constantly in one of two states—before “that” and after “that.” But it knew that there was yet a third state—“that,” which was horrid. “That” was followed by “after that.” Manletely forgotten what it had just undergone. Usually at that moment it saw Skinhead alongside it. If he was not there, Man with the rest, who sometimes had managed to go quite far. It experroach Skinhead, who without uttering a word stuck a small square cookie in its hand. Manikin ate the funny cookie and within a few minutes forgot about its hunger. It walked on and on once again, then suddenly recall how once when it had been walking just that way it had heard a subtle, terrifying sound. It anxroaching. The mallied. It seemed as art of Manikin’s body: at its eyes, throat, stomach, gut. . . Each target would turn anding fear within itself it became enormous, much larger than itself, much larger than any largeness a human being could imagine. And all of this went on and on and on. . . At that moment Manerate urge to shrink, to become little, tiny, the most insignificant grain of sand.
 It attempted to shren target for all the arrows rushing toward it. The greater thansion, this ballooning of its body, the more urgent was its desire to shrink into a grain of sand, into nothingness. . . And then the blows struck. The first, to the head, was crushing and burned its way through. The blow was sharp, sabrelike, and gleaming black in color. Then another, and another. They came one after the next, string, like lightning, the already charred but still shuddering tree of its body. . .
 Sked jaws to lock shut. Someted the wildly arching body with both arms, softening the blows that the madman dealt to himself. . .
 Then Maneated over and over. . . Skia mater. After each seink blood vessels, to emerge. . .
 “More analogues,” Skinhead noted. “We also have an electroshock method for treathrenia. . .”
 He would stroke the calmed half-wlace was left untouched. . .
 Sed like an eye, which bled at the center of the wound. Warent hand against the background of her dark vestments was evident only because of her string of black woolen rosary beads.
 Her departure passed unnoticed. Once after theurse. Skurse. Insed in foil, lay a decayed woolen thread and a handful of ashes. . . Her vestments smelled of cinnamon, which since childhood he had not been able to tolerate, bitter almonds, and incense. . .
 Serson who just arrived caused everyone a mass of headaches. At ffire, this middle-aged citizen of average height imagined that he was dreaming. And icious to him. The campfale, and not hot.
 “It’s all stage props,” the man orts jacket guessed. “Of course, this is a dream, a very entertaining dream.”
 He began to peer d and to tell his wife, Nadya, about it. Her dreams were always unusually stupot. He dreamed only rarely, and never had he dreamed anythfire. He trle sitting around the fire, but could not. Et moving around slightly or their numbers changed. On closer examle were not quite real, but shadows of some sort. Only one of them stood out among the others: a large, thatch of light from the fire reflected on his forehead, his head half bald. A Lenin forehead. He chose Skartner.
 “I have to ask him. . .” And then he stopped. He suddenly began to fear that this was no dream. And  here. . . If you ask that, they’ll decide you’re insane. What’s more, he couldnot remember what exactly had preceded hlace, which was obviously in the countryside, in some unfamiliar locale, and not even in Central Russia. . .
 He peered once agaed to his chest. His son had once carried around just such a case before he left home. . . There was a mangy dog, a fat woman of salm of her hand.
 “That one’s my type,” he thought wleasure. “She looks like Nadya when she was young. ..” The others sank into the twilight, the fire illuminating first someone’s hand, then someone’s back. . .
 “Need to collect my thoughts and fse,” he decided. The sarticular fear. He turned hlace of his existence. So what did he remember? Nadya had served hatties. He dlate angled toward each other. A piece of bread with sausage. Tea. It was Tuesday. He had a convenient class schedule: two more ninety-minute lectures on Wednesday and then free until Monday.
 “Ever srofessor I’ve had a convenient schedule,” he mused. “True, I have extracurrarty organization, and meetings at the rector’s office, which, by the way, I must not forget, are this week. . .” He drifted off on a tangent. “Right, next: I ate breakfast and took Kashtan out for a walk. In the dulsive gray mastiff from the other entranceway. . . Then I went upstairs and changed. . .”
 Just then he noted suit. . . He looked at the toes of his shoes: they were his black dress shoes. At that tut on his old Romanian sandals with the slits. . .
 “So, let’s think this out logically,” he told himself. “When I walked out of the house I had my briefcase. Today I’m lectureriod—‘Fundamentals of Scientific Atheism’ to the entire first-year class. . . I don’t have my briefcase. I don’t remember at all having delivered those lectures. I’m wearing different clothes. Consequently, between leaving the house and now, some event occurred that I do not remember. . . It happened between 8:25 A.M. and. . .” He wanted to look at his watch, but he was not wearing one. . . “It’s evening. But there’s no beassed between the morning I imagine to have been today and now. Any amount of ting track. . . Consequently, I’ve had a lapse of memory. A cerebral vasospasm. So how do I reconstruct what happened next? Probably the Fourth Department Hospital, with a sanatorium or something similar after. . . But how could Nadya leave me on my own? A serson requires. . . No, that’s not like her. . . Strange, strange. . .”
 The Professor politely addressed Longhair:“Excuse me, what time is it? ”
 Longhat,“The same as it was. . .”
 “Typ in a moment and turned away. Sk to go over to him. Once on hace: either the horizon was too close, or the sky was too low .. .
 “What a tlace this is. . . Dev,” the Professor thought, irritated. Skectfully and walked over to him. “Sort of looks like Mayakovsky. The Professor liked Mayakovsky and often quoted him both in and outside the lecture hall. . .”
 Sklaced his hand on the Professor’s shoulder, amazing him with this breach of formality. Skoke first.
 “Professor, I ask you not to worry. And for the time being do not ask any questions. The send a certain amount of time here. Then everythlained to you. . .”
 The Professor nodded guardedly. He was begened to him. . . Of course, only the all-powerful serv, move him somewhere, and then do what they wanted with him. . . Of course, thowerful: the Professor knew this firsthand. He gazed intently at Skinhead. Who was this Skinhead guy anyway?
 Skinhead was dressed in a white cotton shirt with a button at the collar. . . He was wearing a military shirt. . . Military underwear. . . Not quite clarity, but something was beginning to come together. . .
 And the Professor was gladdened by howers of observation. . .
 8
 ONLY NOW THAT THE JUDEAN WAS NO LONGER AROUND donsibilities had fallen to him. At first it had seemed to him that his chief concern was Manikin with its constant seizures. But gradually ernumeraries; each character had his or her own storyline. In fact, less a storyling with the famous fairy-tale maxim:“Go thither—unknown whither; and fetch that—unknown what. . .” It appeared that they all were welded to some task, llace until they fulfilled it. He also was gettroduction wanted from them. Even Skinhead himself did not know for sure why he was here.
 Essentitals. . . Somethedagogue’s role. . . An auxiliary role. . . A midwife’s. . .
 When he had fenetrable and insurmountable wall. She did not recognize him. His first and most urgent desire had been to take her by the hand, to stroke her hair and her face. . . But the Judean had warned him back then:“Careful. What we have here is a case of total amnesia. Let her get used to you, then approach her. . .”
 “Wass? ” Skins out so that her long chestnut hair would fall about her shoulders. . . Throaches a woman he likes but has not been introduced to yet.
 “Perhaps. In part. . . You can tell someone took care that you would recognize her, but that she would not recognize you. . . It seems to me,” he concluded softly, “that ting. . . To meet her on her own terms, so to speak. . .”
 S alongside her. Her presence, ot in his heart, that old scar, throbbed. . .
 He had difficulties with the others. There were those two women, beyond doubt a couple—a rather comtives. A small chain, like that on a bicycle, connected the tall one’s right leg to the little one’s left leg. It encircled their ankles in a figure eight. Sklaced by a shining ball of either glass or metal. When they walked, they er into their wounds. . .
 “They’re try and can’t do it,” Skinhead figured out at a certain moment.
 Shortly after, he dlaced his huge hands, slightly inclined toward each other on their heads, they would calm down. Before h, and scabbed over. . .
 The assed. Hlexity.
 After one of theoint he sensed clearly which direction they needed to go. What used to show hictures” now suggested which direction to move in. . . They set off in their usual order: single, maximum double file—Longhair with his case, Fat Lady with her enormous stomach, and Tiny and Longlegs with their chain. . . Skared himself for a long trek, but rather quickly a dark structure resembling an outbuilding came into sight in the distance. Closer up, they discovered that it was not a structure at all, but a section of forest densely bound with leafless branches. Like a nursery. Strange low-standing trees. Their trunks and branches were almost identical ingirth, grayish brown, without the slightest hint of leaves. From a short distance it seemed as if the branches moved slightly. There was something invidious about their movement.
 “Let’s go closer,” said Skinhead, and all of them, like children, obediently moved closer. The branches really were moving. They were covered over entletely hairless, loose, baggy, wrinkled skin and just as gray-brown as the trunks of the trees. They gnawed at the bark hungrily, ravenously, emitting an almost machinelike buzz.
 Skulled it off the trunk. It grumbled with discontent:“Let me go, let me go. . .” He straellent creature was a human being. Its trotruding, with bright-white rodentlike teeth. The muscles around its mouth automatically tensed, and its jaws continued to make their gnawing movement.
 Sklaced it back on the branch he had just removed it from.
 “My Lord, who is that? ” asked Newling in horror.
 “The thirsty seeking to be filled,” Skinhead said derisively, then hesitated immediately: What am I doing? Why am I teasing her again? What inveterate madness. . .
 Some wall cracked or curtaarevo. . . Lev Tolstoy and the Gospel, not the Gospel of Tolstoy, but the original one that she had received from her grandmother. . . Immedels that he had obviously and deliberately distorted:“Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. . .”
 “No, no, I am not making a mockery. I’m sorry. That’s just my way. . . I only wanted to say that that is their truth. . . All passion ultimately dies, does it not? ” he containfully from his words. “Just not everyone manages to feace in the time allotted.”
 He bent over and p off the ground a startled creature that had just fallen off a tree trunk. Now it was not a human rodent, but resembled more a human worm. The creature was motletely childlike.
 “That’s it. It’s been filled. Now it most resembles a five-month-old human embryo.”
 The Professor glanced over the Newling’s shoulder. Something terrifying came into his head, and he asked hoarsely: “Is it dead? ”
 “What are you saying! There is no death, Professor. And this one, I think, is considerably closer to the beginning than to the end,” Skinhead answered mysteriously.
 At thloded:“I hate riddles! I demand a clear and concise answer to the question of what is going on here. If you consarables and allegories so that they make some sense. . . ? ”
 “What parables! ” Skinhead laughed sincerely. “You and I haven’t even got to the alphabet yet! ”
 “Mlain! I have ortant connections in the most serious of organizations too! ” the Professor chirred, and Skinhead seemed to retreat at his shouting and started to reason with him.
 “Do pardon me. I in no way wanted to offend you or anything like that. . . You and I can discuss all this, just not right now. A little bit later. Now’s not the time. It’s not appropriate. . .”
 The Professor calmed down: that riate was something he could understand; it sounded convincing. And leasing that at the mention of his connections Skinhead had changed his tone of voice. . .
 The beautiful woman stood alongside, tears flowing down her cheeks. It was apparent to the Professor that Skinhead had his eyes set on her.
 “The poor, poor thered. And unexpectedly quickly she asked Skinhead: “Is the tree bitter? ”
 He looked at her and responded very quietly, but the Professor heard it all down to the last word.
 “Bitter? Of course, it’s bitter. . .” He mot going in the indicated direction.
 9
 IT WAS A LONG, LOW MOAN THAT DESCENDED INTO A uterine growl. Sking along on its sluggish feet. The source of the groan turned out to be Fat Lady, who was dropping to the ground. W from behind. He helped her fall ose. Fat Lady lay there, her legs bent at the knees as she attempted to clasp her enormous stomach. A puddle spread underneath her back. . .
 “Is she giving birth? ” Skinhead was astonished. “How strange that someone can glace. . . On the other hand, why not? ”
 The woman wore a flannel robe wressure of her writhing body. With skilled fingers he undid the rest. He pulled the hem of her ny breasts, and what he saw took his breath away. At filina, growing on them, each of them the size of a tea saucer. He touched one of the shells: arasitical growth. All these plarouted in her stomach. There was even a sort of monstrously attractive artistry to this living network.
 Never ractice had Skinhead seen anything like this. He had no oon he stuck between Manikin’s clenching jaws whenever its seizures began. Nothing but his bare hands. . .
 He began to examate her stomach. On fation he thought he felt the fetus’s hand. Hhragm.
 “A breach presentatlications with the turn of the legs. He wanted to contunched through the taut wall of the belly and came through to the surface. Fat Lady howled.
 “Hold on, hold on, my dear,” he calmed the woman.
 What is this? Perforatrelum, and the surface of the skin? That’s unimaginable! How macerated must the tressure from a fetus’s hand? He pressed her stomach once again: it was hard and dense.
 Just then heared. The woman’s entacked solid with infants, like a fish with caviar. The larent from the dense little nails on its fingers—a significant indicator of maturation. . .
 Wening from which the little hand had emerged. The woman moaned.
 “Hold on just a bion,” he bolstered the woman with his automatically vigorous tone of voice.
 The opening to turn the child by the head. It turned very easily, but face-first, not neck-first. The doctor made laced his hand under the back of its head.
 The woman moaned, but she was no longer shouting, and Skinhead continued mumbling his usual, calming somethings, without giving it a second thought.
 “That’s good, Mommy. Your first child? Second? You know what you’re doing then. . . Breathe deeper, deeper. . . And not so fast, count to ten. . .”
 Everythed out. A normal, live infant lay in the doctor’s hand covered in thick vernix caseosa. . . With no umbilical cord. A child could be born without arms, without legs, and without a head. But without an umbilical cord? The umbletely healed. . .
 Despside down, smacked it on its moist buttocks. It em insulted cry:“wah-wah. . .”
 How long had laintive sound of new life? . . . The patheterformer himself. . . The infant cries out of fright at the new sound.
 But thectations. The ool in the air. . .
 Sked down to his knees alongside her. Among the raushing its way outward. The place from which the first infant had just been extracted had closed into a folded navel, so there was no need to suture it. Skted to feel with his hand whether the head and the foot belonged to one child or two.
 The woman screamed. Skressed on the woman’s stomach so that it was easier for the head to come through. A shell-lath. The second boy was also without an umbilical cord, but Skinhead now thought only about how not to let this child float off into the sky. However, the phenomenon repeated ating vortex.
 Wulled a section of the cord that had grown into the woman’s stomach in its tightly clenched fist. Thalm and floated into the air.
 The dtied considerably, continued to be enormous.
 The next chrised Skinhead by emerging the most natural way, through the birth canal, but it also did not gladden him with an umbilical cord. That was the sixth. The seventh was born rted to restrain it. Strmentally one lagged behind the other by about seven weeks. That just doesn’t happen. . . True, wment. . . But there was no toked the little hand of the next client waiting to emerge. . .
 When the multle births finally ended, the woman asked where her children were. Skatient, the one for whose sake he had waged his battle with medical bureaucrats, with his colleagues, with his friends, and even with his family. . . She was exhausted by work beyond her strength, hunger, blained as best he could that her children must be in heaven. She sobbed bitterly.
 “But what about me, not a single little child for me, not one? ”
 She lay there as he kneeled before her. The tangle of growths and cords had slackened and now hung around her hs, which were covered with stretch marks and abrasions. He pulled at one of the shells, and it remained in his hand. Dense and alive as worms just moments ago, the cords crumbled in his hands, and the entire confused network fell from her body like a dry hull. Some sort of leathery membrane that rems. Her body recovered its human dignity. And her eyes, ringed by dark circles of suffering, looked at the doctor with gratitude. He knew well that exhausted, somewhat vacant look of a woman who had just given birth. . .
 “Can you walk? ” Skinhead asked.
 “I’ll stay here,” she answered.
 Sklants off the ground, and lit a fire.
 “You rest, my child, just rest. Everything will be all right. . .”
 She began to move, and rose up on one arm.“What do you mean—all right. . . ? ”
 Skinhead looked back: they were waiting for him. For the fut out the fire as he left.
 They set off further in their usual fashion, in single or double file, and Skinhead, looking back, could still see the bluish flame in the distance. Then he heard a hollow smackt over by light drifts of sand. . .
 10
 FOR A WHILE THE PROFESSOR DISPLAYED A CERTAIN acqued battering Skinhead with questions. He trable of giving an intelligible answer to any of his questions. He delroach Skinhead so as not to lose face yet achieve some degree of clarity. Tht driving it away. What was more, a strange apathy had overcome him. The campfire had a twofold effect on him: it calmed him, but also dulled his mind. . .
 One tectful courtesy.
 “Could you tell me, please, whether you have any means of contacting my family, my wife, that is? I am certain that she is very worried. . .”
 “In prle, I do. What exactly would you like me to communicate to her? ”
 “Well, first of all, that I’m alive and well. You see, we’ve been marrarated for any length of time. If for some reason I cannot be returned to my former posreciate the full extent of his, the Professor’s, discretion, “might she be sent to join me? ”
 Skinhead scratched behind his ear with his thick finger.“Hmm. . . Could you tell me whether or not your wife believes in God? ”
 The Professor was indignant:“Excuse me! Well, we’re atheists, of course. I am a phher, a Marxist, and I teach Marxist-Leninist aesthetics. My warty member. . .”
 “I see, I see,” Skinhead interjected. “Are there any people of faith in your family at all? ”
 “No, of course not. My mother-in-law was an ignorant village woman, but she died—rest her soul—in 1951. . .”
 “Well that’s of no significance whatsoever.” Skinhead seemed to want to calm him.
 “I’m sorry. What’s of no significance? ”
 “That she’s dead. . . In prle, we can get in touch with her. Only, you know, I would advise you to limit yourself to a brief message, on the order of, say, ‘Everything is all right. Don’t worry. . .’ How can you invite her here if you yourself don’t have a very good idea of whereit is you are? ”
 “Clever bastard. He’s hosition was so tenuous that he could hardly make demands or insist. And clash? There was no one to complain to. . . For that reason the Professor merely affirmed: “Yes. I really don’t have a very good lace is, and for a long time I’ve been wanting to obtain some information from you. . .”
 Skinhead chuckled.
 “I’m not too sure myself. . .”
 “Well, froximately how long I’m going to be held here and when I can go back home? ”
 Skathetically, it seemed to the Professor.
 “I can’t really say anything about your term either. As far as home goes. . . I’m afraid you won’t be returning home ever again. . .”
 The Professor gasped wt his calm and asked almost frigidly:“On what grounds? ”
 At th and ran his hand over the fire. The flame went out, as  into this hand.
 “We’ll have occasion to return to that conversation. For the time being let’s leave it at that your wife will be informed that you’re all right, Professor. . .” The Professor ronounced his academic title. . .
 11
 THE NEWLING WANDERED THROUGH A MULTISTORIED bulex with long corridors and flowerbeds along the walls. An enormous number of doors led off from the corridor, each with a marker that was at once neither a number nor a letter but, as often occurs in dreams, very distinct. The Newling, skilled as she was in dreams, immediately guessed that these markers belonged to the category of things that exist only in dreams and never squeeze their way through to anywhere else when the dream is over. There exly disintegrated. The Newlly disintegrated. She walked past each of the doors and realized at first glance: the wrong one. The one she needed was connected to some elderly woman.
 She had already rushed through mear at any moment. And, ened the door. The room was brath somewhere in Vologda or Arkhangelsk. There was a sink in the corner, and an electric samovar stood on a table covered with a red-and-white checkered oilcloth. The bed was voluptuous, lillows. There were flowers on the windowsills. Next to the door, on a bentwood chair, sat a chubby old woman, the bridge of her nose notched by her glasses and with a dog-eared book in her hands. On another chat a calico cat that was so fat it barely fit on the seat. It was around midmorning in the room. The old woman was waiting for her: they were either very good friends or distant relatives.
 “Should we have our tea? ” the old woman asked.
 “With jam? ” The Newling smiled.
 “How else? I’ve made gooseberry, and strawberry, and forest berry.” The old woman er lids.
 “And wild strawberry? ”
 “How else? I gathered them myself. . . In the fields nearby. . .” From the bottom shelf she pulled a jar already opened, removed the paper loonful of thick, aromatic jam into the jam dish.
 The Newling looked at the jam.“You didn’t overcook it, did you, Marya Vasilievna? It’s terribly thick.”
 The old woman waved her hand with annoyance:“I did overcook it just a bit. But it’s better to overcook it than undercook it. It gels better.”
 “That’s true,” the Newling agreed.
 The old woman plugged s.
 “It boils fast: I like it. . .”
 The old woman set two cups on the table; the Newling asked for a third.
 “Why three? ” the old woman asked rise.
 “For your Nadya,” the Newllained.
 “Oh,” the old woman seemed anxious. “I thought we were going there, but it turns out she’s coming here? ”
 “What difference does it make? The main thing is that we get to see each other.”
 “That’s true. She’s having a very rough time these days,” the old woman nodded.
 “You should tell her that Misha gave instructions to say hello and to let her know that everything is all right.”
 The old woman continued to nod, while the Newling continued.
 “And how are you doing, Marya Vasilievna? ”
 “Me? I’m good. . . I’m reading this book. There I was illiterate, but here I’ve learned to read.”
 “What are you reading? ”
 “This.” The old woman slid the dog-eared book to the Newling. “The Young Guard by Fadeev. Nadya said a lot of good things about it. . . It’s a good book. But ens to those kids. Only,? ”
 “Somethened the volume. “To our dear Tanechka on the day of her acceptance into the Young Pioneers. Valya and Misha Remen. May 1, 1951.”
 The memory stabbed at her heart, and she woke up. The campfire barely burned. Everything was as usual. The wind had calmed down. People were relaxing. She herself sat a bherd.
 The mutt was the most ordherd raised doubts: something about its canine essence was not right. There was somethanion—you could hardly saymaster—as well as all the others. What was more, onse to questions: yes, no. . .
 Dog Wht face. A reddish scar—like the trace of a hat band worn many years—crossed his forehead. He came up behind the Newling, and both the dogs turned toward him.
 “You should go sit on the lee side. . . The w,” he advised the Newling.
 “What? ” she asked.
 “So that it doesn’t blow in your face. . .” He offered her hass.
 “How good herd’s dense fur. The shepherd smiled. “When I was a little girl I had dogs when we lived in the country. . . But in town I have only cats.”
 The man was pleased.“That makes a lot of sense. I also have only cats at home. I’m a professional dog handler, you know. Twenty years with dogs. Trained hundreds of them. I’m conv sadly: “And in general. . .”
 “What ‘in general’? ” the Newling wondered.
 Dog Whoke heatedly and quickly. It was obvoken for a long time.
 “You see, there’s a lot of deep means with humans. A cat generally has no need for humans. What does it need? Warmth, food. That’s true. But it has absolutelyno need for humans. I would even say that cats despise humans. They’re smarter than humans. Humans th humans. Cats can’t be forced to do anything. They don’t even like to be asked. . . I’m a trainer, I know: they don’t want to submit for anything. They have their dignity. They need humans to serve them. And you know, I, for one, lendence. Cats never grovel. For example, a cat may rub up agaressing tenderness. . . No, it’s stretching its muscles and scratching itself against your legs. It’s gleasure to itself, not its owner. You, you serve the cat and not vice versa. Wlaced his hand with two disfigured fingers on one dog’s head. “Happy will confirm that.”
 The dog looked expectantly at Dog Wherer: confirm what?
 “A dog ed child. It needs your constant attention. Your help, your attention, your caring. . . Dogs, excuse my menty, who sadly nodded its head. “Who besides a human being will go to its death for the sake of an idea? Only a dog! ”
 The Newling was amazed: that had never occurred to her.
 “Yes, yes. . . Search dogs, for example, will search for land mines. . . During the last war dogs attacked tanks! That is, I don’t mean to say that they went wittingly to their deaths ‘for the Motherland! for Stalin! ’ The dogs died for their own idea: in service to their masters. . .” Dog Why: “Tell me that’s not so! ”
 The dog sighed a human sigh and nodded. Suddenly Dog Wherer’s vigor subsided, as he fell into silent thought for a bit, then, without raising his eyes from the ground, continued.
 “That’s my job nowadays: I work as a guide for dogs. They’re all mine, my little dogs. I raised them in a kennel in Murom, trained them, and then they get sent wherever: some go abroad, to Afghanistan. Happy’s an Afghan vet. . . I’m about to guide my twenty-fourth. . .”
 “Where are you guiding it? ” the Newling asked quietly.
 “Where, where. . . Abroad. . . To the other shore. . .”
 “Ah-ha,” thought the Newling. “That means that some people here know where we’re going. . . To the other shore.”
 12
 THEY WALKED ON AND ON THROUGH THE MONOTONOUS, sad, and undulatace until they arrived. The sandy desert ended. They stopped at the edge of a gigantic fault filled with a gray fog. Somewhere off ressed to the ground or distant mountains or a forest closer in. . .
 “We need to take a rest,” Skinhead said, extending his fire-bearing hand over the dry branches. As always, the warmth and the lathetic fuel.
 Warrlants—looked into the fire and asked Skinhead: “Why does it require fuel? That fire of yours burns just fine on its own.”
 “Yes, I notot. Another campfire ignited. On its own, without any fuel. . . “You see how we’ve all grown a bit wiser of late. . .”
 “Even too wed morosely.
 Skhs, and gave each of them one.“Eat. You need to get your strength up.”
 The Newlrised. The taste of the cookies was indistinct, herbal, and reminded her of the flat cakes her mother had baked in lean years from dried goutweed seeds mixed with a handful of flour. They were pleasant to eat.
 “We’ll rest here for a bit, and then we’ll make our way over in that direction.”
 They sat, absorbing the heat with their fatigued bodies.
 Skinhead called Longhair over; the latter followed him unwillingly. Together they began d of a nearby hill. A while later they brought a bunch of whitish-yellow rags that seemed as if just removed from the linen sterilizer. They tossed them on the ground, and a mults flew out in all different directions.
 “Put on gloves and booties,” Skinhead commanded.
 Reluctantly they began to sort out the strange garments: the sleeves had long straps on the wrists, and the canvas leggings tied just beneath the knees. The garments were as cumbersome as they were uncomfortable, and  on the right arm. The Newle with the dangling ties. . .
 The Professor, who had begun dair that matched, suddenly flung the rags aside and barked:“This is a mockery! You’ll answer for this! You’ll answer for this mockery! I’m not going anywhere! I’ve had enough. . .”
 Sk to him.
 “Quit your hysterics. There are children, women, and animals here, after all. . . If you don’t want to come, you can stay here. . .”
 The Professor regained his self-control and modulated his tone of voice.
 “Listen! Would you just tell me why I’m here? What is going on here? What klace is this? ”
 “The answer to that question lies on the other shore,” Skinhead answered curtly. “But if you insist, you can stay here.”
 The Professor turned away, slumped over, and moved away from the campfire. . . He easily transitioned from overbearing bossiness to humble subordination.
 Sked Longhair secure his case to his back.
 Both campfires had burned down. Cold flowed from the fault, and ort them all to the other side. He approached the edge of the fault. The others crowded l behind him.
 “We’ll take the bridge. Come stand at the edge.”
 Cautice. They craned their necks: there was no bridge.
 “Look down, down there.” People made out a metal constructths of the gray fog of the fault.
 Sked, and the entire monstrous construction swayed like a rowboat. Hward toward them, barely shone from below. He waved. Each of them standossibility.
 “Manikin! ” Skroached the edge. Its feet in their canvas bags sweated and felt heavy as stone. There seemed to be no force strong enough to make it follow Skinhead. But there was: far off in the distance a sound arose, barely audible to the ear, forewarning of an intolerable shower of black arrows. Maneared in the fog.
 The construction swayed again. At that same moment the Newling felt the sand under her feet move and shift. The sandy sole began to cave in and loosen, and an avalanche began behind their backs. It grew and w behind them. . .
 The next to plunge was Longhair. Then the pair of women chained together—Longlegs first, and Tiny screaming downward after her. Wool or bath. Warrior. The dog. One more woman in a running suit. A man with a briefcase. Strange Animal. A blindfolded little girl. The Newled downward as one of the last. . .
 None of them fell like a rock—they all descended slowly. Earts was weaker. Down below the wind gusted. It carried them relatively far from each other in different directions. Some landed on the brlanks; others, like Longhair, were less fortunate. He stood on the ort was located at a decent distance and beyond reach. He rolled back and forth to maintain his balance. His case got in his way.
 Worst off was Manikin. It lay hors. . .
 The uneven rocklunged into the gray fault. The brort, and it now hung by its arms alone. . .
 The wind would die down, then gust madly from the fault. The constructonded as if alive to each contact. The fog gradually began to dle could make out an artful steel labyrinth, constructed by some mad troll or insane artist. The Newls and inside-out turns, as if the façade and infrastructure had been reversed.
 “It’s face, the thought occurred to her. It cannot exist in nature. And ossible to fall? The fall would be fictive then as well. . . But I’m not fictive. . .”
 Ske, changing levels. He went to each of them, lightly touched their hands, heads, and shoulders. And salained something, inquired. He was tender and convincing.
 “We have to keep moving. We have to make it to the other shore. Don’t rush. We can go slowly. Even if we have to inch our way. None of you will be lost. We’ll all make it there. Just don’t be afraid. Fear edes the ability to move. . .”
 Hoses the construction had caught them in, slowly began to maneuver.
 Mans of its tensed fingers. The stone we from the rail’s side surface.
 Ws will no longer sting me in the head and stomach. . .
 At the last moment it sought out Skinhead: he was nowhere to be seen; there was only Longhair rocking off in the distance, hugging some black object. . . Manikin unclenched its fingers and flew downward. Not lrint carried by wind blowing garbage. . .
 Despite the lightness and slowness of its fall, the blow of its landing was shattering. Broken etrified shells, and two unmatched running shoes. Its body, shattered iritual trace of warmth, tenderness, affinity. . .
 The creatures gathered lane wreckage. Some, the most sensitive, sobbed, while the others shook their heads and lamented. Then one of them said:“We should call the Doctor.”
 Others objected:“There’s no need for the Doctor. That’s a corpse.”
 “No, no, he’s not a corpse,” said still others.
 Someone wse! Corpses can be revivified! ”
 A kind of discordant meeting ensued.
 Then the largest and eldest of them was wheeled in. He was so decreplaces. He wheeled up close, accidentally running over Manikin’s broken fingers with his front wheels. He sighed a bit and announced:
 “He’s a corpse. Condition zero.”
 The gathering stirred, burbled, and rustled.
 “Can’t anything be done for him? ”
 “There’s nothing you can do.” The Doctor shook his head flatly. “Except donate blood.”
 They all fell silent. Then one of them with round eyebrows and big eyes said,“There are a lot of us. We can do it.”
 One with a long nose interjected:“What about blood substitutes? There are substitutes for blood! ”
 But the Doctor did not even look in his direction.
 “Six liters of live blood, minimum. Or there’s no getting him on his feet.”
 “We’ll do it, we’ll do it,” the gathering rustled. The Doctor in his wheelchair seemed angry.
 “How are you going to do it? Each of you has six milliliters of blood. You can’t donate more than half. You know that I gave five milliliters and my legs never returned to normal.”
 The squirrel-rabbits grew agitated and chattered again.
 “If we bring him back to life, he will be. . . handsome. . . intelligent. . . They have children. . . and can build and draw things. . . Let him live. . .”
 “Very well,” the Doctor agreed. “But I have to remind you of the following: before you lie the remains of a criminal. A murderer. A very cruel and merciless one. And senseless.”
 They all took fright and fell silent. Then the curly-headed one woke.
 “All the more reason. What’s there to discuss? He needs to be given a chance.”
 “I don’t disagree,” smiled the Doctor. “I just want to remward and acquires the qualities that you sacrificed for him. . .”
 “Yes, yes. . . We know. . . We want to. . . We’re agreed. . . agreed. . .”
 They enceared a white sheet, and a mysterious medicine set to work. . .
 THAT PART OF THE LABYRINTH WHERE THE NEWLING had landed held a chaotossible to shimmy down them. The Newler could advance: all she could do was turn back.
 She sat down in confusion. Looking down terrified her. She raward. Up above ran a parallel chaorts were relatively close, and she decided that after resting a bit she would try to modify her route. True, she got the ath ran somewhat off to the side. But there seemed to be no other way out. Amazed by the l. Her canvas stockrotected her from the touch of the cold metal. But what was most surprising was that this exercise turned out to be quite fascinating, and her entire body rejoiced. What was there for it to rejoice about? Perhaps that ush off, then recover in the air, and relax slightly before landing. Each ensuing shimmy was easier and freer, and she totally forgot any sense of constraint or danger. . .
 That’s probably what’s so wonderful about sports, she guessed as she pulled herself to the landing above. Here there was more light, and from here the other shore seemed not so murky. . .
 The Professor made he to an angled bollard and sat down on it. Two rusty ra. He sat morosely,  in this absurd, entirely fantastic situation. The wressive cold.
 “Maybe it’s a dream, after all? ” The Professor returned to thteenth time. He ran hs across his face and head. He touched his gums with his tongue: his dentures were missing! How had he not noticed earlier? Where could those fartment’s dental clinic have gone?
 He sat ose, dressed in his best suit, wearing all his medals, but without a single document, and having lost his dentures. Or had someone pulled them out of his mouth? This is awful. . . Awful. . .
 “Have I really died? ” His fidgety brain, which had studiously avoided the word, suddenly slammed right into it. . .
 In the dot flashed by.
 “Listen! Your Eminence! ” shouted the Professor, and Skinhead immediately headed in his direction.
 “Now, we need to gather our strength and, without rushing. . .” Skinhead began in his always low-key voice, but the Professor grabbed him by the sleeve of his white shirt and bawled.
 “Will you just tell me finally, did I die? ”
 Skinhead stared with a lingering gaze at the cringing Professor and said exactly what the Professor did not want to hear from him.
 “Yes, Professor. I can’t keep it from you any longer. You died.”
 The Professor shuddered, and then he sensed a burntiness in his chest familiar from his heart attacks. His hands and feet grew cold. All these sensatlacing his hand in the area of his heart.
 “You’re joking. But news like that really could kill me.”
 “I’m not joking. But utting it another way makes you feel better, you can consider your worldly life over! ”
 “So am I in hell? ” The Professor fidgeted on his bollard. “Keep in mind that I don’t believe. . . in any of that! ”
 “Yes, I myself don’t believe in hell. But for the time being you’re going to have to reconcile yourself to the current state of affairs. It’s very ortant right now that we make our way to the other shore. . .”
 Skushed them lightly with his foot, and they immediately fell in line with the bollard. After which Skinhead walked off.
 The Professor sat in stunned silence. The fact was that Skinhead strode with his wide feet in their canvas surgical booties right through the air. He. Maybe there was a rope?
 The Professor stepped cautiously onto the unsteady rails. . .
 Longhair just rocked and swayed, and there was nowhere for him to move: the nearest landing was about ten yards away. The movement of the pite his sensitive musical ear. For some reason he knew that as soon as he understood the numeric formula he would be able to direct his movement. He listened closely to his feet, to his tibia and femurs, to his thirty-two vertebrae-conductors—and the resonator of his skull. . . He was beginning to make something out. . . a kosed on the other. . . Five thirds. . . That was it. Honded and adjusted. Falloles beneath his feet had become controllable to an extent. The amplitude of their motion around their axis increased. But tharallel to the closest landing and did not bring him in any way closer to it. In addo got in the way and grew ever more recognizable. . . He had it: seven-eighths! The second axeared immediately. . .
 Somethed his case. But he held on. He pressed it to his chest. He stroked it. Ht him from feeling it, and he wanted to remove the glove. Swted to undo the ties on his left hand. The knot was tight and tangled; he bit at it with his teeth. . . He felt unexpected help coming from the air itself. It was helping. The fams, even a woman’s loosened hair curling under its own wind. This vortex of air turned out to have a woman inside.
 The knot loosened and undid itself. Longhaed his left hand, tossed off the glove, and felt that the knot had loosened on his right hand as well.
 “Qulait of animated air. It was warm, even hot; it coaxed, caressed, nestled close, and hurried him. . .
 His movement corrected itself of its own, directed itself, and little by little brought him closer to the landing. Longhalaced it in Longhair’s hands.
 “Play. . .”
 His hands held an instrument. An instrument for. . . W of which. . . It was the most ortant thing for him, but he did not know how. . . Hlace and recognized the keys. His left hand searched. . . It was followed by tormenting confusion.
 Hot fs.
 “Play already, please. It’s stossible to go back.”
 The wooden mouthps. . . And the swlicity. Hlicity. He gathered aletely.
 The vortex subsided and hung in the air. Longhaart of it. Hlastic reed. All together arated. He was explods. . . He exhaled—carefully, so as not to frighten away the emerging miracle. . . The sound was music, the intelligible word and living voice all rolled into one. The sound made the center of honding with joy. . .
 Poor humans—a head and two ears! Malleus and incus. . . Stapes and habenula. . . Three turns of the cochlea, the mlugged with wax, and the Eustachian tube filled with scales of dead skin. . . Ten clumsy f of the lungs. . . Music? ! The shadow of a shadow. . . The approxroximation. . . A suggestended in the dark. . .
 The most sensreading under their lower eyelid. . . A yearning for music. . . Suffering for music. . .
 Lord God, come among us! He came. And stands behenetrable wall of our earthly music. . .
 The Professor heard and began to weep. Hated: he truly had died, for such things did not occur on earth. He had always been proud of hick out a tune on the accordion, although he had never taken lessons, and even his blockhead son had inherited his musical talent from him. . . But this was another kind of music. It spoke clearly and distinctly of the senselessness of and necessity for beauty. It etals. . . It also spoke to him something that grievously shamed the Professor for those aimlessly lived years. . . No, that’s not it, someone else had said that. The Professor was tormentingly ashamed of everything about himself, from birth to death, from toes to head, from morning till night. . .
 All movement, all the clambered. All fell quiet and still. Even the tlayed at the bottom of the fault lifted their large-eyed little heads and listened. . .
 But Longhair was almost not there. He was entirely dissolved in his music; he himself was music. Of his entire being there remained only a single crystal suitable only for recognizing that miracle in the making. There remation, like an inflatable woman with a hole that smelled of rubber. . .
 He dt the whitish fog. The museared entirely. And wreserving in himself the echo of the bursting film. . .
 13
 ON THE SHORE MORNING WAS BREAKING. THE DAWN WAS strong as undhabet. Beherienced it as a rough seam between two fabrics of different textures. What was more, it now was of absolutely no interest. The world unfolding before her eyes resembled the best of everything she had ever seen in her life. She remembered now all of her past—from early chages were scribbled with lame tortured letters. . .
 The lerfect morning resurrected in all its details illuminated the moment. The long torture of unanswerable questions—Where am I? Who am I? Why? —had ended in an instant. It was she, Elena Georgletely new, yes, the Newling, but now she wanted to gather together all that she had known and at one time forgotten and all that she had never known, but seemed to have remembered.
 She took several steps through the grass and was amazed by the wealth of ositioning of stalks, and even the vulvar connections between the thin blades. As if the blind soles of her feet had acquired sight. Somethened with her vision, her sense of hearing, and sense of smell. Elena sat down on a hillock between two bushes. One, just about to bloom, was a jasmle and strong smell; the second was unfamiliar, with dense leaves highlighted with a light border along their edge. Its smell was sour and cold, peculiar. The earth em earthy mustiness, the juice of a crushed stalk of grass, strawberry leaf, wax, bitter chamomile. . . And even the scent of a person who had stepped there not long ago. . . She immediately recognized who.
 Animal sense of smell, that’s what it is, Elena noted. There were also too many sounds for such a quiet morning—the grasses rustled loudly, each with its own quality: the rigid grasses sounded more shaggy, while the softer ones emitted slithery sounds. The leaves of the shrubbery rubbed up agaloded with the sound of a taut grunt. A tread out in flight. Moreover, Elena saw somethressed tightly to its gray belly. . . It slward. . . The geometry and aerodynamics of flight—study it as you would in school. . . How is it I never noticed that before, Elena wondered.
 She sat atop the hillock, inhaled, watched, and listened, as she accustomed herself to the new earth and to her own self, also new. She hurried nowhere. Soon she felt that she had tired of the unaccustomed intensity of the sounds and smells, stretched herself full length on the grass, and closed her eyes.
 It’s s when everything feels so good. . . But maybe I’ll have a dream?
 She fell asleep on the bare ground without even noticing that she herself was naked. . .
 Sktain, came onshore last. What was moving where was entirely unclear: was the fault moving away from the shore, or was the earth itself drifting in an unknown direction? It looked l along the shore. . . Everyone he had helped by extendearing somewhere. The last to come onshore had been the bing on the metal rungs. The dog was met by an entire brigade of tiny humanoid and at the same time slightly avian figuresin white cocoons. They took it into their arms and hauled it toward a large tree scorched on one side. The landing on which Skinhead stood rocked and floated away from the shore. He almost dropped the stepladder. An unknown force pulled hice.
 Skinhead set foot on land. The first thing he noticed were the bones of his own foot, all twenty-nine of them, just as on an X-ray. Or twenty-eight? They shone unobtrusively through his skin. Skleasant deformity: the joints between his os metatarsi and the bone of his big toe were enlarged. He addressed what he was accustomed to calling his intravision.
 “Well, thanks for not having abandoned me.”
 IT WAS A WONDERFUL PLACE, IF FOR THE SOLE REASON that the sun was at  and down. He looked around and deared, had healed over, as if it had never existed. Skinhead smiled and shook his head: it wasn’t much needed. . .
 The world ared him to do this. Everytheaceful, and warm. The wfire and food. He set off to the East following the beck of the wind.
 The half-scorched tree remained behind, and he did not see how they covered the dog lying on the earth with a big blanket and then drew lines and formulas over it.
 “Everything all right? Did it come out correctly? ” the smallest asked atiently.
 “I think so. As far as one can tell from the surface,” the largest answered him.
 “It will be a nice woman. Beautiful.”
 “And happy? ” inquired the little one.
 “Expect so. . . The potential is there. . . All osed to be transformed: fidelity, the ability to serve, ingenuousness. . . In this case an innate cheerfulness. . .”
 “Then why can’t we move to phase out and launch? ” The latient.
 “What are you saying? How could we do that? On the contrary: end some more time here. So that the lower layers fill out. If we launch immediately, just imagine what she will dream of. It’ll be awful! When those animal instincts start breaking through. . . Thredator after all. . . You should know what the results are when they’re underprocessed. . . Well? ” The older one awaited an answer.
 The little one was at a loss:“We haven’t studied that yet. I just started the third level. . .”
 “All right, all right. If you haven’t studied it yet, you will soon. . . But you’ll also know from practerience—werewolves, maniacs, and murderers of all sorts, from serial killers to those in the general staff. . . Got it? ” He offered the clarleasure.
 “Oh! ” The little one was amazed. “But making sure all the lower layers get filled out—that’s quite a job! ”
 “And you thought our work was easy? ” The older one raised the edge of the blanket. Under the blanket lay a large woman wturned nose and a receding forehead. “But if we do a good job now, it will be a very good woman, a loyal friend, and a devoted wife. Come on,” he beckoned the younger one. He placed haws on the receding forehead and began massaging lightly. . .
 14
 THE FOOTPATH NOW WENT UPHILL. WHEN HE REACHED the top of the hill, he saw from above a small, narrow, winding river. In a sandy basfire burned, almost invisible in the sun’s rays, and a smoke-blackened kettle hung over the fire. Near the campfot. Skroached him and said hello.
 “The tea’s ready. The ficked with his stick at the fish lying on a flat rock in the smoldering coals. “It’s ready.”
 “Did you catch it in this stream? ” Skted the hot fish arranged on leaves.
 “Some fishermen brought it. I gave up all those pastimes—hunting, fishing—in my youth. To be honest, I also gave up animal-based food then. Out of moral considerations.”
 The baked fish was tasty, although bony. It resembled a large ruff or a mariny dorsal fin. The old man then poured tea from the kettle ened it. Insiece of comb honey.
 The old man’s face was famut a name to it. He turned out to be rather chatty, and talked about his children, his grandchildren, and little Vanya, about whom he had worried so much and for absolutely no reason. . . He lambasted someone named Nidity was a misfortune, not a sin. Now I’ve changed my opinion. Stupride.”
 Wed the murky but very tasty tea, then set his mug on the flat rock and sighed.
 “Of course, I’m ol Stories brought me that, went to my head, and fed my overconfidence. It was the basidity, which exceeded all the talents granted me for the taking by the Creator. . . But the stupidity itself was mine alone. . .”
 “Why, of course, how didn’t I figure it out right away! That’s why the face is so familiar. . . That face with Socrates’s wrinkles, the little eyes under brushy eyebrows, the broad Russian duckbill nose, and that world-famous beard. . .”
 Skinhead egged the old man on, not without a certain craftiness.
 “You’re right, you’re right. My wid. . .’ She would take offense.”
 The old man knitted his brows and stroked his beard with his large, flat fingers.
 “You said that to her? There weren’t many who understood. . .”
 “That was in your time. . . Nowadays a lot of people have figured it out. . .”
 The old man coughed and grabbed his sack.
 “Let’s take a short walk: I’ll show you my study. . . I, you know, have taken an interest in the natural sciences of late. . . I’m working on some theories. . .”
 Sk with regret. He was already beolite. . .
 The little house was hidden away in an old oak grove. It was small, the span of three windows, which were almost entirely hidden behind lilac bushes.
 “The buds have already emerged and should blossom in about five days or so,” Skinhead noted. The porch had three steps. There was a bucket in the entranceway. The old man opened the door into a rather large room with bookcases along the walls. There was a me on the table. A second table, near the wall, served as a kind of laboratory, with chemistry vessels and reactants of some sort. . . Amazing.
 “You’ll be more comfortable here lease. . . I’ve been wantorary scholar, for a long time now. My nobleman’s education, you know. . . I didn’t study the natural sciences in my youth. Goethe, I’ll have you know, received a brilliant education. He knew mrofound understanding of the natural sciences. . . We, though, did our schooling at home. . . A half-baked education, in a way. . .”
 Eulling his, Skinhead’s, leg. . . He couldn’t tell. . . Then he pulled out hronouncement, with even a certain suffering in his voice.
 “For fondering these questions. The local licity of mind, and I am unable to discuss everything with them. What’s more, osition. Their skin is too thin. . . For me you are a conversatartner long overdue, the kind I have not had for many years. . .”
 As the elder spoke, he unrolled some papers curled erweight.
 “My discovery concerns love. At eak, chemical, level. I’d like to share with you, Pavel Alekseevich, a few of my thoughts.”
 Skeech of this majestic man with his slightly too fussy eyes, than by the sound of his name returned to him. . . A lost connection had been restored. . .
 “Love, as I now understand, needs to be examhenomena, like the force of gravity or the law of chemical affinity discovered by Dmitry Ivanovich Mendeleev. Or the law—I forgot, what was that Italian’s name? —according to which liquids in various tubes all even outat one level. . .”
 “He didn’t attend school. . . Educated at Yasnaya Polyana, that’s what. . .” Pavel Alekseevich chuckled to himself. “Apparently the sression on him. . .”
 “Haec ego froclaimed Lev Nikolaevich, “that carnal love is allowed for human beings! I erred along with all of our so-called Christianity. Everyone suffered, everyone burned hical, and lofty, owing to shame over one’s own, innocent, God-given body for which joining with another is innocent, blissful, and good! ”
 “There’s no doubt about that, Lev Nencil. It contaermatozoon.
 “That inclination lies at the foundation of the universe, and the Greeks, and the Hindus, and the Chinese all understood that. We Russians, though, have understood nothing. Only Vasily Vasilievich Rozanov—an essentially odious gentleman—saw the light to an extent. Our upbres have led to our not having achieved love. And a person who has not achieved love of life cannot achieve love of God.” He fell silent and sulked. “Love occurs at the cellular level: that is the essence of my discovery. All laws are concentrated in it—the law of conservation of energy, and the law of conservation of matter. Chemhysics, and mathematics. Molecules gravitate toward each other as a function of chemical affinity, which is determined by love. By passion even, if you will. Metal assionately desires to be oxidized. And note the main thing: this chemical love goes as far as self-renunciation! Giving themselves over to each other, each ceases to be itself: metal becomes oxide, and oxygen entirely ceases to be a gas. That is, it yields its natural essence out of love. . . And the elements? The way water aspires to the earth, filling each and every crevice, dissolving into each and every crack in the earth, the waves licking the seashore! Love, erfect form, also denotes denial of the self, of your own being, in the name of that which is the object of your love. . .” The old man wrs. “I, Pavel Alekseevich, rejected everything that I had written. It was misguided. All of it. . . Now I sit here, and I read, and I think. And I weep, you know. . . I sale’s lives, but I never found the words of truth, no. . . I never wrote what was most ortant. I failed to understand anything about love. . .”
 “Pardon me, Lev Nikolaevich! What about the story about the young peasant who fell off the roof and died? Wasn’t that about love? Why that’s the best thing I ever read about love in my whole life,” Pavel Alekseevich objected.
 Lev Nikolaevich started.“Wait a minute, which story was that? I don’t remember.”
 “‘Alyosha the Pot’ it’s called.”
 “Yes, yes. . . There was one called that,” Lev Nikolaevich reflected. “Maybe you’re right. Maybe I did write one story.”
 “What aboutThe Cossacks? OrHadji-Murat? No, no, I can’t agree with you, Lev Nikolaevich. Isn’t the word rocess occur in it as the one you just described? And eech is an element—even if not of the highest order, at least you’ll agree, sufficiently highly organized—then you, Lev Nikolaevich,are the master of love and nothing less. . .”
 The old man stood up. He was not very tall, bandy-legged, but broad ressive. He went up to the bookcase: er bindings. Lev Nulled out volume after volume, searching for the story. Then he opened age he needed. Pavel Alekseevrudny.
 “So you propose that this is a good story? ”
 “A masterponded concisely.
 “I’ll be sure to reread it. I’d forgotten all about it. Maybe I really did write something worthwhile. . .” he mumbled, glancages.
 The sun was already setting. Pavel Alekseevromised to come again, if he were able. Lev Ninion. He was in a rush to reread his old story. Lortant than anyone else’s. . .
 The old man walked out onto the porch with Pavel Alekseevich and even kissed him good-bye. Pavel Alekseevlace where not long ago there had been a riverbank.
 15
 THE FOOTPATH WOUND ALTERNATELY UPHILL, THEN DOWNhath. At each turn new detaened out before him: it turned out that the bed of the stream was raised, and that the water flowed thick and slow. A large piscine gaze that was both benevolent and intrigued.
 The next turn revealed a low-lying, curly garden. In the garden stood a bench nalanks. A tall woman got up from the bench and came out to meet hed cane ahead of herself. This could only be Vasilisa, no one else. Her eyes were covered by a whlaying blindman’s bluff. But there was something else that was strange about her face. When she came closer, he saw that above the bandage, in the middle of her forehead, there was a large—more bovine than human in size—bright blue eye with thick girlish eyelashes.
 “Pavel Alekseevich, I’ve been waiting for you. I’ve been sitting and sitting, and you never come.” Vasilisa rejoiced. They were already next to each other, and he embraced her.
 “Hello, Vasilisa, sweetie.”
 “We’ve met again, thank the Lord,” she sniffled. Pavel Alekseevich nodded. The eye had two tear ducts, so laced in the center of her forehead. “They took away the old eyes and gave her a new one? ” he thought, but, it turned out, he said aloud. Vasilisa laughed. Pavel Alekseevich realized that he had never heard her laugh before.
 “They didn’t take them away. They operated on them. On these, the little ones. They said that only you could remove the bandage. After I told you something. But they’re clever: they didn’t tell me what to say. So I’ve been sitting here on this bench and thinking all the time about what tosay to you.”
 “And? ” he inquired. “And what is it? ”
 “Forgive me, Pavel Alekseevich,” she said ingenuously. Pavel Alekseevich was astonished beyond words. What sort of chunishing her, ordering her to ask for forgiveness. . .
 “It’s all silliness. It doesn’t matter.” He waved her off.
 “What do you mean? I grouped you with the evildoers. Forgive me. And now take off the bandage. Please.”
 They returned to the bench. Vasorted her by her elbow. How strange: didn’t that beautiful bovine eye see anything?
 The bandage had been applarently. He removed the bandage and unfastened the protect from one eye. Under it there was yet a layer of gauze. Carefully he detached it. All the sutures were internal. The eye was swollen, and the eyelids slightly stuck together.
 “Well, open your eye, Vasilisa.”
 She hesitated. Then opened it. She blocked the other walm of her hand. She looked at him with one eye.
 “You haven’t changed a bit, Pavel Alekseevich.”
 “And the second one? ” he asked.
 “No, I’ll wait for a while with the second one. I’m more used to it that way. So, have you forgiven me then? ”
 “I was never mad at you, you fool.”
 She laughed again. Her laugh was a girl’s, bashful. Resolutely, he turned her head et-design headscarf toward him and undid the second eye. She squealed, now entirely like a little child. Then she placed her hand over her mouth and saleadingly: “All right. You go now. God willing, we’ll see each other again. There are a lot of things to do. . .”
 He rose from the bench, sighed, and asked after all the question that he had been wanting to ask from the very beginning.
 “Listen, Vasilisa, why were you using a stick to walk? Doesn’t that third eye see anything? ”
 “It’s worthless. Doesn’t see a thing.”
 “Nothing at all? ”
 “Not quite. I could see from afar what you were really like.”
 “And? ”
 “It’s hard to put into words. . . In the image and likeness you are. . .”
 He waved his hand and set off.
 16
 SHE HAD REALLY DREAMED IT. A VERY SIMPLE DREAM—water. It splashed at her ankles, and then rose higher. At fended. The water kept comoured over her head, filled her nose and mouth, and made breathing difficult. Impossible.
 “Now I’ll drown,” she realized, when she was over her head in water. She held her breath, then slowly released the last remaward. “How stupid it is to drown, when everything has ended so well. . .”
 When holdened her mouth and allowed the water to enter her. But eened; she didn’t choke, although at first she sensed a cool stream filling her throat and lungs.
 She dove and swam off. The water penetrated her body, and this was just as natural as if it were air. Floating islands of seaweed and schools of small varicolored fish engulfed her. The layers of water overhead were pale, the color of the northern sky; below—blue dark as ink, with no bottom to be seen. But, when her eyes accustomed themselves, she was able to make out the subtle twinkle of stars. Warmer streams mixed with cold ones, creating a sliding movement, like that of the wind.
 Her body did what she wanted it to, but she could not remember having been taught to swim. It seemed that she had not known how to swim before. She pulled her arms above her head, cupped her f for air. That’s when she woke up.
 She exhaled: a small amount of water ran from her nostrils and mouth. A slery garland of seaweed had tangled itself around her knee. Her haed. Uslace. Her hales, which she did not like. Straulled them between her fingers, as if through a giant comb.
 “Elena.” She heard her own name and turned around. Before her stood her husband, Pavel, neither young nor old, but exactly as he had been when she had met him—forty-three years old.
 “Pashenka, fart of his body, where his clavicles came together.
 He sensed how the outlained and suffering from melancholy and dissatisfaction without even realizing what hole they resided in.
 Elena wlintered dreams and constantly losing its uncertain bounds.
 It was not he entererture of hers that led to nowhere; it was she entering and filling his hollow core, the center he himself had been unaware he had and had suddenly discovered within himself.
 “Soul of my soul,” he whressed her tightly to himself.
 At the place where theiness. Thendency. But poor human copulatroximity. Because the bounds are set by bodies themselves. . .
 Between them the lace. Of what remaanded beyond all horizons. In thy, an ability to see many things at once and to think many thoughts simultaneously. All these paces stretched between unknown systems of coordinates, and of losing the axis she once really had lost—the axis of time. . .
 A flace, and not a trace remained of the scar across her belly.
 But that does not mean that what had been was no longer, they—man and woman—guessed. It means that everything—thoughts and feelings, bodies and souls—can be transformed. Even those tted by the grim circumstances of disfigured, bloody life. . .
 When they had settled y, soul to soul, hand in hand, letter to letter, it turned out that between them there was a Third. The woman recognized him immediately. The man—an instant later.
 “Was it You? ” he asked.
 “I,” came the answer.
 “Merciful God, what an idiot I was. . .” the man moaned.
 “It’s nothing to fear.” A voice familiar to him since youth calmed him.
 There was nothing to fear. . .
 Part Three
 [Картинка: _1.jpg]
 1
 ELENA AWOKE IN HER OWN BED, IN HER OWN ROOM, BUT illow, everything keeled over sideways. . . Adjustted to collect her thoughts. The last thortico. After that there was a gaping void. Then she set her thoughts riest before that, and before that, the evening before—her conversation with Tanya. Tanya had lanning to quit the university.
 Before that, the evenorted. Vasty bottles in Pavel Alekseevich’s study. Everythart.
 Elena once aga, but everything again swam before her eyes. She asked Vasilisa to call a doctor.
 The district doctor, a finicky and good-for-nothing matron, arrived toward evening. She measured her blood pressure. It was normal. But she romised to send a neurologist to the house. She drescribe any medicine. She was afraid to. For her, house calls to thunishment. Vast trying to feed her. But Elena did not feel like eating.
 Rather late in the evening Pavel Alekseevich arrived. He was disturbed by the news. He dropped into Elena’s bedroom and sat down on the bed, smelling of vodka.
 “What happened? ”
 “Notharticular. My head inning.” She did not want to mention her loss of memory. It was too terrible for words. . .
 He pressed his hard thumb to her wrist. He listened. Her pulse was normal, and the volume was good. There were no irregularities. . .
 “You’re tired. Upset. Maybe you just need to relax. Should I get you a reservation for the Academy of Science’s sanatorium? ” Pavel Alekseevich asked.
 “No, Pasha. You see what’s happening with Tanya. How can I leave her now? ”
 “In the past he would have said ‘reservations,’” Elena noted to herself. “We haven’t been anywhere together in eight years. . .”
 They talked about Tanya. Pavel Alekseevich felt that it would all work itself out.
 “A grow crisis. I thortunity to make some decisions on her own.”
 Elena lethargically agreed. In fact, she had hoped that her husband would be able to do someth all of Tanya’s troubles, and that everything would be all right again. But Pavel Alekseevich merely asked if he should arrange for a decent neurologist. Elena declolyclinic tomorrow.
 “Why didn’t I offer to go to the sanatorium with her? ” Pavel Alekseevroached himself as he walked out of the room.
 Everything between them was just a hair off.
 Each of them had an opt turn in Tanya’s life. Strangely enough, the sternest judge turned out to be Toma. The girls had lived together in one room for eight years. By now Toma understood—not merely erson—just what a lucky number she had drawn on the day of her mother’s death. . .
 The thoroughly bourgeoat in the face of their world order.
 That spit both stunned and outraged Toma. She had so inion, as best she could, quaking at her own daring and fear of losing Tanya’s goodwill as a result of her comment. Complex thed out of school! ”
 For Toma the last was the most senserienced certain stirrings inside: for the first time in her life she wanted to go to school. She had not expressed this to anyone aloud yet, but in her head she had been calculating whether it would be better for her to go to technical school or to aim higher—for the forestry institute.
 Vasler: the girl was out for a good time.
 Elena essentoint of view, but in milder terms. She saw the reason for her daughter’s changed behavle in her life whom Elena did not know.
 Pavel Alekseevostulated that Tanya was undergoing an overdue youth crisis. Likely he was closest of all to the truth. Whisode with the stain and the dead fetus that Tanya had related to him with such emotion. It seemed to her down. In addersonal, not MarLena Sergeevna’s, laboratory assistant. He asked Pavel Alekseevected to see her during his office hours that Tuesday, after twelve noon. . .
 After hangrofessional conflict with MarLena Sergeevna, whom Tanya had too quickly, from her first day on the job, set as her model.
 Tanya’s lhone conversation with Gansovsky. Tanya just shrugged.
 “What’s the point of going? I’m not going back there anyway.”
 “Tanyusha, that is certainly your right. But don’t forget that I made that request on your behalf and brought you to the laboratory myself. Don’t put me osition. Ultlomatically.
 Tanya vrieties! ”
 He took her by the head and stroked it.
 “What do you want to do, little one, change the world? That’s already been done. . .”
 “Dad, you don’t understand anything! ” She bawled into his chest.
 Then ran off, leaving Pavel Alekseevich dismayed: the girl was twenty years old, but acted liked a teenager. . .
 2
 THE LATE SLUGGISH SUMMER DREW TO ITS END WITH AN August heat wave. Tanya had been living her strange nocturnal life for two months and was increasingly more drawn into it. The geography of her lonely walks expanded. She trale demolished long ago. She often strolled along Patrloring the baffling confusion of its connected courtyards. She lark bench on the side facing Bolshoy Patriarshy Lane.
 The nle who filled the streets when it was light out. Morosely soberles who for the sake of their refugeless lovemaking nested in entranceways with wide windowsills and unlocked attics. . . Once, on the uppermost landing man and was horrified: was he dead. . . ?
 The other thles on their way home. In fact, these were not nly slightly delayed. After one, they were replaced by loners, art. They were not dangerous, although sometimes they accosted her. They would ask for somethhone booth; or offer something: to have a drink, to make love. . . She sometimes had conversations with these inebriated loners. . . The most dangerous people, it seemed to Tanya, came out between three and four thirty. In any case, her most unpleasant meetarticular time.
 She spat out lit all her former knowledge from school and from books. What ected maneuvers and nimble moves: she delighted every time she found a new courtyard that connected two dead-end lanes or a building with entrances at both sides—the façade side and the servants’ entrance side. She knew Moscow’s last water pump, forgotten by the waterworks’ authorartment in a half-basement—a thieves’ den? —where very cres gathered at night. The ms, fame. But now ut two words together. . . When she had been lle.” Now she had discovered a new dimension: “the obedient” and “the disobedient.” This was not about children, but about adults—intelligent, enlightened, and talented adults. . . Tanya decily crossed over to the second category. True, she was still not quite clear where her father stood: he did not fit in either category. He seemed to be socossible. . .
 Once olished handle. Tanya sat down on the edge of the bench. Wut dinner on the table.”
 “How do you know who I am? ” she wondered, at fure coincidence.
 “I’m telling you again: it’s time to eat dinner.”
 “Where do you live? ” Tanya asked.
 The old man seemed a blexed, then worried, then answered not entirely confidently.
 “I live. . . here.”
 “Where here? ” Tanya asked again, this time realizing that the old man had lost his memory.
 “In the town of Gadyach, in the Poltava guberniya. . .” He answered with dignity.
 “What is your name? ”
 “It’s tths, and leaning on his cane. “It’s time to eat dinner.” He sank back down, unable to liberate his rather unwieldy body.
 Dawn was approaching. Tanya helped h bench that was as awkward as a wooden hammock and said,“Let’s go. It really is time for dinner. Tanya’s waiting for you with dinner.”
 She led hut dinner on the table on time. At the precartment 2. Lepko, Alexander Ivanovich.”
 “Good-bye, Alexander Ivanovich.” Tanya bid him farewell, regretting that she had not noticed earlier the calling card written along the stick.
 “The penultimate stage of freedom.” Earlier such a thought would not have occurred to her.
 When she left the precinct station, dawn was already breaking. The nle had not yet emerged from their lairs. Tanya was  room for tea, and that she would buy a cake and some candy as a way of celebrating her liberation. . .
 Her tea party dlanned. Of the sleasant—the elderly Tasya Kukharikova and thieving Galya Avdiushkina. They each ate two put the rest in the refrigerator. There was no one le were on vacation, some at a conference, and others on their research day in the library. MarLena Sergeevna also wasaway.
 Tanya dropped into her former room and with no regrets or sentimentality whatsoever recollected that first day when her father had brought her here. Everythes, the microtomes, the torsion scales, the batteries of glass bottles of alcohol and xylol secured with slightly bent metal lids. What had once seemed to her the temple of scidated. In the molecular bment—not the stuff in this museum of the history of science, the nineteenth-century room. She wanted to have nothing to do with any of this anymore. Only the smell—the heavy laboratory smell of alcohol and formaldehyde mixed with vivarium and chloroform—remained, after all, a bit thrilling.
 Tanya pulled out the drawer of her desk and gathered her personal belongose—her notebook. . . She tossed it all in her bag and headed for Gansovsky’s office. She knocked on the antaque glass inserts. She entered. Gansovsky—tanned, his hair freshly dyed brown, in his white coat—was sitting at hisenormous desk, reading a journal.
 “Come in, come in.”
 The only chair for visitors held a mountain of books. He ladder. The bookcases ran to the very ceiling and could not be reached from the floor. In its folded state the staircase resembled a high chair.
 “Take a seat.”
 Tanya plopped herself on the tlatform, which turned out to be rather uncomfortable. Her legs did not reach the floor, so she rested them on the lower rung. Her orange skanties, and she noticed the tenacious male gaze with which the old academician surveyed her bare legs. Gansovsky removed hathetically.
 “Well, Tatlanning on leaving us.”
 “Yes, I’ve already resroduct of a Polish-Lithuanian and, rumor had it, Jewish mix.
 “Aren’t you being a bit hasty, Tatiana Pavlovna? ”
 He stood up, and Tanya’s posladder became even more ridiculous. The professor stood riled with books. Tanya turned her legs so as not to touch h.
 “You made such a good start at your work. I have to admic. It’s very erson to begin their research career early. Next year you could publish your first scientific article already. . .”
 Tanya docket, visible through the cloth of the coat.
 “You’ve mastered the technhaly,” he continued. “MarLena Sergeevna told me that she could trust you with any stage of the work. I just don’t understand why you want to leave.”
 Now he gr. Lretended not to notice.
 “You have three years of classes left, and loma thesis, but half your dissertation.”
 He looked her ression was absolutely matter-of-fact and even stern. He took h and stuck it between the buttons of his lab coat, beneath his belt, and rummaged about. Tanya followed hulations out of the corner of her eye.
 “There  her leg.
 Tanya was ready to faint. Not because hlace at the moment.
 “Thercent. . .”
 He undink bulb with the longitudinal slit in the middle that he held in his broad freckled hand. He had already posressing on the back of her waist. . . Tanya’s lockjaw ended the moment he stopped talkread your legs a little wider and throw your shoulders back.”
 Tanya shoved him in the chest.
 “Sit still! ” he bellowed, but she had already jumped from the stepladder and run for the door, grabbing it by the round knob that was exactly like his bulb. The door would not budge.
 “The pig, he locked it! ” Tanya thought, and bashed her fist with all her strength against the glass insert. The glass flew out wen.
 “Idiot,” he said calmly. “Turn the handle.”
 He closed his lab coat over the flash of his bare chest and academician’s bulb in the unfastened fly of his light-colored slacks. . .
 Tanya flew out of the le of science with all its nastiness, filth, and sleaze.
 THE YAUZA WAS CONSOLING, ESPECIALLY IF YOU DID NOT look at the factory bued their sewage back. . . The potters, tanners, the first industrialists. . . But the river remained untainted, alive. . .
 Tanya ascended the hunchbacked breered into the morosely green water.
 Her slashed hand hurt. The bleeded, but the bandages had managed to soak through. At the drugstore she had chanced on a kharmacist. Wrofessional bandage. She bound Tanya’s me. The deepest cut was between the flace as her mother’s scar from the fishhook—wasn’t that weird?
 Tanya had no money on her—she had left her bag  with medical books that Tanya would never read in this lifetime. A good  her bag from Gansovsky. Lay it out just like that: Gansovsky tried to screw me, but I got away. And ask hected. Actually, there was no way she could say anything to him. Though he was a well-mannered person when ly murder Gansovsky. No, not murder. Beat the hell out of him. Make hamburger out of him. Tanya laughed, pummel his dyed head with his heavy fists.
 “Poor Liza! ” she saeering for the last time at the Yauza’s water. “No drowning for us.”
 She no longer trembled from excitement, and she had the urge to tell someone right away about her adventure. But there was no one to tell. She, it goes without saying, had tons of girlfriends, but her closest friend, with whom she had studied in the same class, had married immediately after graduation, quickly gave birth, and was now sitting at their dacha with her baby. Tanya did not know the address of the dacha. Two of the nicest girls in her year at the university had set off for the Caucasus mountain region for vacation. Toma in this case was out of the question. Besides, she was not Tanya’s friend. Dossible. In addened, the whole business madly excited her. That bulb had made an ression. . .
 “Seems I’ve fallen behind. . . That old coot is vile, but he got to me somehow. . . It’s about time. . . That’s nonsense: I don’t like anyone, and I certainly don’t love anyone. . . All my girlfriends already have lovers. . . I could use some advice from a knowledgeable older woman, but there aren’t any around. . .”
 Wlanted with old lindens at regular intervals. There were mitals, antiquated and semiantiquated yellow buildings, maybe barracks or dormitories. The street was called Hospart. This was Lefortovo, and Tanya was here for the first time in her life.
 Since morning she had had nothing to eat, but she did not want to go home. All her money was in her bag.
 “It’s much better to have no money at all than not enough,” the thought suddenly occurred to her. It was a strange awakening: whatever else there hadn’t been, she had always had money. She had her own salary, and there was the tin in the kitchen from which anyone could take however much they needed. (Vaseck, which she found amusing and gay. She knew perfectly well how to get home way the fare at home. . .
 She also, however, was without keys: they too were back in her bag. That new skockets. I wockets again. . . She also enjoyed being hungry today: it made her feel light and free. . . Waortant had finally come to her, about freedom. What, for example, had made her decide that she wanted to study biology? As a chraised her. She started readraised her again. That’s what she wanted really—praise. . . She trraise her. She’d been bought on praise, the good girl. . . Enough! Over! From now on my actlease my father, my mother, Vasilisa, anyone. Only me. I am my own judge. Freedom from the opinion of others. What inion means anything to him? Of course, it does. They all want to be liked by each other. That is, not all, but by everybody. Circles. Castes. Closed societies. . . Rat-killers. Obedient. We, intelligent human beings. . . What banality. . . Not for me. . .
 It never entered her head that the entroximately the same thing. But she had arrived at this on her own, without anyone’s suggestions or cheat sheets. Independently. . .
 She walked along the high cemetery fence behind which stood tall grave markers under tall trees. . . She stopped at the gate: VVEDENSKOE CEMETERY. Right. This was the former German Cemetery where all the Kukotskys lay buried, Tanya surmised, and entered.
 The path crossed the cemetery perpendicularly, from one gate to the other, with graves and grave markers extending in all directions. Antt. Chapels, marble angels, plaster vases, crosses and stars, stars and crosses. . . Amazingly, in all her twenty years Tanya had never been to a cemetery. She had never once been to a funeral, unless you counted Stalin’s. She had been in a crematorium once or twice, but had not really understood what went on there. But here lace charm. She walked through the old part of the cemetery, studytions on the monuments: the Kukotskys had to be here somewhere.But she encountered none of them.
 She found herself once again at the fence, this time at the other end of the cemetery. Two men sat near a newly excavated grave. There was a pile of shoveled earth on one side, and the two workmen sat in the low bushes of the grave site to the other side. Theiece of sausage, and some yellowed green onion. The bottle of vodka was propped against two bricks for stability.
 One of the workers was elderly and wore a cap; the other was younger and bald, and wore a cap folded from newspaper. Neither of them looked at Tanya. The freedom that had fallen to her today prodded her to ask them for some bread.
 Barely looking at her, the elderly one grumbled:“Go ahead.”
 The one who was younger made a fuss:“What about earning it? ”
 “I cut my hand.” Tanya trustalm with the bandage coated from below and the side with darkened blood.
 “I wasn’t talking about with your hand,” the young man retorted.
 “Take ened bottle.
 But the younger one would not let up.
 “Pour you some, maybe? ”
 “No, thank you.” She took a large hunk of bread and small poke as she chewed.
 “My grandfather is buried here. Kukotsky’s the name. I can’t flot.”
 “Go to the offectfully than earlier. The grostitute, but she was one of theirs, a client. . .
 Thanking them, Tanya left, leaving the two of them with their bottle.
 “You amaze me, Senka,” the old man said thoughtfully. “You’re supposed to be married, and you’ve got a decent woman, and a kid. What do you need that stick for? Phoo! ”
 Senka snorted.“Uncle Fedya, what’s so bad about it? I would have screwed her right here on this grave. What’s so bad? ”
 Tanya walked past the office. The path led her out through the other gate onto a ramshackle street toward a drrawling center of so-called culture further in the direction of the tram lines. The tram was a good mode of publortation suitable for freeloaders. It was already turning dark, but something was not right with the time: the day was turning out to be too long. She looked at her watch, a present from her father, and it showed two thirty. It had stopped.
 A completely empty tram, the No. 50, approached. She did not have time to see where it went. Most likely, to some metro station. The tram was long le got on. They crossed the Yauza. The last stop turned out to be the Baumanskaya metro station. It was nearly ten, but she didn’t feel like going home. . . Tanya circled the large cathedral and found herself on Olkhovskaya Street. The courtyards on this street of almost entirely one-story buildings were good dirt yards, with gardens and benches, children’s sandboxes, and swings. There were no new buildings, just old lower-middle-class dwellings. Only one of them had five stories, a Moscow moderne building from the early 1900s. Tanya felt tired, walked into the first courtyard, and saw—what a gift! —a gazebo. Inside the gazebo there was a crude table and two benches set into the dirt. A place for playing dominos.
 Tanya lay down on one of the narrow benches and turned her head iece of the sky thick with stars. From somewhere came the sound of radroletarian argument.
 “I am a very, very free person,” Tanya sa without noticing. She woke up from the cold. There was no tellt. Not long, it seemed. In the meantime, the moon had come out, filling everything with its artificial light. She still had no desire to go home, but it was time. . . On the earthen parapet of a completely rural-lookths of the courtyard sat a boy. With concentrated attention he was conjuring over his wrist.
 Tanya walked up closer. He heard her steps, turned around, and froze, grasping the wrist of his left hand with his right hand.
 “Beat it,” the boy said rudely.
 Tanya just stood there without moving. Half of a razor blade shone in the strong light of the moon. Understanding, she said to him:“That’s not going to work.”
 “Why not? ” He raale face that seemed tear-stained, with a fresh black-and-blue mark swelling under one eye.
 “You need to do it in the bathtub, in warm water. . . ,” she saathizing. “It won’t work otherwise.”
 “How do you know? ” the boy asked glumly.
 “I’m a veecialist. I spent two years studying veins. That’s go. You’re better off jumping from the roof—Bam! And it’s over.”
 “Not for me! ” The boy smirked. “I need a machine. Understand, I don’t have a machine. But if I cut it wider, I can stick a vial inside. . . If you’re such a specialist, maybe you have a machine on you? ”
 Now Tanya did not understand him:“What kind of machine? ”
 “A syringe, idiot! ” he explained.
 “Oh, a syringe. I have one at home.” Wonder of wonders, she had llaying the idiot. . .
 “You live far away? ” The boy l with interest.
 “Far away.”
 “Then what are you doing here? ”
 “I’m out for a walk. I like to walk around at this time of night.” She sat down alongside him and noticed that he was older than he had at first seemed. “Let’s go for a walk. I like to look inside windows. . .”
 She pulled him by the sleeve of his checkered shirt, and he obeyed. He wrapped the razor blade ocket of his shirt, and hurried after her. She led hassageway between two houses that led to a barely visible walkway toward an illuminated window. A dirty lightbulb streaked with whitewash hung naked on its cord. A chair stood on a table, and there were sawhorses as well. The room was being remodeled. Obviously, they had forgotten to turn off the light. The wen. The first floor.
 “Let’s crawl osed.
 “No, I’ve already done t. That’s enough for me.” The boy scurried ahead. “What lace? ”
 “I lost my keys. . . And, in general. . .” Tanya was at a loss. Everythsy-turvy.
 “All rosed magnanimously, and they set off to wander further.
 They walked wressing against each other with their arms and their hollow stomachs and hands that were sticky from the little bit of blood that had managed to flow through the tiny cut across his vein.
 They went up to the last floor of the very same Moscow moderne building that Tanya had noticed at the beginning of her journey along Olkhovskaya Street. A light burned on the fourth floor, but beyond that lay mysterious darkness. A story above the last floor, near a padlocked entrance to the attic, there was a small semicircular window with flowing casements that cast curvilinear shadows in the strange light. They kissed a bit longer, standing at the wide windowsill. Then she sat down on the windowsill and did everything that Gansovsky had wanted of her.
 “Gansovsky ordered that stepladder especially for that kind of stuff! ” Tanya guessed as the boy pulled her onto himself.
 Warting absolutely no significance to the event whatsoever. The boy accepted thected gift in total bewilderment.
 “You still got your cherry? You’re my first. And do you know how many broads I’ve had? ”
 Tanya laughed at his street slang and shook her bandaged hand.
 “What a bloody day I’ve had today. . . And you too. . .”
 Then he sat down alongside her on the windowsill. Though wide, the windowsill was too short for them to lie down on.
 Ten m during the fall draft as a border guard—and some other gibberish about real men. . . Tanya had no interest in this whatsoever. She jumped off the w.
 “I’m out of here! ”
 And she flew down the stairs, clicking distinctly with the heels of her flats.
 By the tened, she was already two floors down.
 “Where are you going? ” he shouted after her.
 “Home! ” she replied, without slowing down.
 “Wait! Wait! ” he shouted, dashing after her. But she was already out of sight.
 3
 PAVEL SENSED MORE THAN KNEW: CALL IT STARS OR whatever, but there was something beyond human beings themselves that guided human life. He was convrogeny. . . He allowed that other aspects of human ls, of creative energy were governed by this same mechanism. Determal law of life. But he was unable to extend thhysical course of ontogeny. Hrotested. However, a human beiritually diverse human beings, some of whom achieved great deeds, others—crimes, while some died in birth of scarlet fever and others on the field of battle. . . Had a plan been preprogrammed for each of these innumerable millions? Or was fate a grain of sand on the seashore? What unknown law dart drink itself to death. . . One in ten had survived. . . Who regulated this mechanism?
 As far as he himself was concerned, Pavel Alekseevich knew that his fate was headed downhill. He stient moment, the sensation of being one with the times, with which he had existed for many years. Hiness. . . Gone was the feellaced by a monastic and laconic union built without touching and almost entirely on understanding glances alone. . . Somethlicable reason.
 Hart. Just as before, she was rarely at home, but earlent away from home. He was chagrurest form. . . As opposed to his—an old-man’s—time, which slid by, weightless and even more worthless. . .
 What had once been the burnrofession—was becoming more and more automatic and losing its value, if not for those around him, then for Pavel Alekseevich himself.
 “The relative weight of time decreases with age” was Pavel Alekseevich’s diagnosis.
 Fater. Elena, who had been waiting for him, also came out of her room. She sat down at the table Vasle at the table. Pavel Alekseev. Tanya rarely ate supper at home. Toma, who had embarked on further studies, came home after eleven four times a week, and if she ate with the family, she was silent most of the time. They exchanged the most ass the salt, thank you, very delicious. . .
 After supper Pavel Alekseevich retired to his study and over the course of the evening drank the remainder of the bottle, leaving two fingers at the bottom for his morning dose. Tht to kill it.
 Ilya Iosiest streak of his life. In the beg of blood. For hh on the nature of genius he was awarded a doctorate in biological science without having to defend. True, many years later Ilya Iostly fulfilled the requirements of a doctorate. But at tharticular moment he was enamored of his own work and had not yet reconsidered his hardly genial achievements in the field of genius research. Ilya Ioshony smiles at this former foot soldier from the front lines who out of the blue had entered the ranks of heroes.
 The mat secret from everyone—was named Valentina II. A graduate student from Novosose of a basketball forward. In point of fact she was the best shooter on her university women’s basketball team, and her athletic vigor benefited from the inner resolve of an Old Believer: she was descended from a family of schismatics. One of her ancestors had accompanring. It was to these folk, tempered by centures. For starters her parents thrashed her watriarchal ferocity and forbade her from going to school. But the larents: they had met their own match. One faith against the other. . . Followes, Valentina left home, bearing on her already broadened shoulders her grandfather’s curse. Next came boardend. In her last year she read several articles by Goldberg in the journalGenetics and chose him to be her mentor. She arrived in Moscow with a recommendation to graduate school—she’d graduated with honors after all! —sought out Ilya Iosassed her entrance exams.
 To Goldberg’s credass before he noticed the amorous charge emanating from his new graduate student. He dal object of the laboratory’s investigations.
 The maroximated the image of his late wife. It needs to be noted as well that during her life Valentina I had never struck him as the ideal, but after her death, over the course of the years, he idealized her more and more in his memory.
 The broad-shouldered, droll graduate student wanse, in her men’s shoes and dark-blue lab coat, in no way inclined Ilya Iosifovich to thoughts of his inveterate loneliness, his unsettled bachelor life, or, even less likely, of the youthful frivolity of falling in love or of sexual conviviality. . .
 Valentina endured and endured, and then confessed her feelings. Ilya Iosouse. . .”
 After which they both started thinking. Valentina—about transferring back to Novosibirsk; and Ilya Iosifovich about the sweet girl who had avalanched on his bald head like Siberian snow. . . And the more he thought, the more he liked her. The ftoms of lovesickness occurred simultaneously with the arousing thought of the obscenity of having relations with a) a graduate student in general, and b) a graduate student who was almost forty years his junior. . .
 Gansovsky, of course, would have just smecially designed device. . . But Gansovsky would never have cause to exper, Valentina remained with him in his cold hotel room. . . For all her awkwardness to dulled down to her shining eyes and wedging at the bridge of her nose she was for Ilya Iosifovich a streak of amazing lightning. (She was ranked natt, secrecy. . .
 Pavel Alekseeviration. He and his friend saw each other not very often, but no less than once a month. Usually Goldberg arrurely man-to-man conversation until the wee hours of the night. Not about war, or horses, or drreviously unknown termsociogenetics. . . Although Goldberg loved abstract, phrecisely formulated question. Hublishing articles in international journals. Everyone knows that Russossible to do the work in your head, on your fingers, and without serious financing.
 For all their disagreements—which over the course of the many years of their conversations constantly, like a cat in a bag, made themselves known—Pavel Alekseevich and Ilya Iosifovich coincided unconditionally in one regard. They shared a clear sense of the hrimitive but also formed the very foundation. In the ancroximation was not allowed, and answers had to be unequivocal: yes or no. . . Speculatrecisely on reliable knowledge measured with a ruler, a thermometer, or a hydrometer. . . And so, Goldberg based heculation about genius on levels of uric acid in blood. Goldberg’s new letely unfounded. Goldberg roof. Pavel Alekseevich did not want to hear anything of the sort.
 After three terms hysically, and morally. . .
 “Okay, Ilya, I am prepared to agree that les, miscegenation. . . Ultometric research. But how can you measure moral qualities? No, that’s rubbish. I’m sorry, but rofessional. . .”
 “I assure you, there are ways. They’re indirect still, but they exist.” Ilya Iosifovich defended his theory. “Suppose the human genome conslausible figure. They are dairs of chromosomes, right? Although we know a lot about the vars by chromosome affiliation. Well, of course, that’s ossible to do today, but a hundred years from now, I assure you, it will be doable. And just roximity to the gene that determines cowardice or bravery! There’s a good chance that they will be inherited together.”
 “One gene for one quality, you’re saying? ” Pavel Alekseevich objected. “It seems unlowerful and diverse quality as courage would be determined by a single gene.”
 “What difference does it make: let it be ten genes! That’s not the point! The poly that eye color could turn out to be linked to another gene. Crudely put, a blue-eyed person has a greater chance of turning out to be heroic,” Ilya Iosifovich raised his index finger.
 “Great idea, Ilya,” Pavel guffawed. “A blue-eyed blond is brave, while a black-eyed brunet is a coward. And if the black-eyed fellow also has a hook nose, then he’s a Judas, for sure! Geneteaking. . .”
 “You’re a typrovocateur, Pasha! ” Ilya Iosifovich wailed. “I had something totally different in mind. Listen! In 1918 the Whroductive age—left Russia. The arower! ”
 “Where are you going with that? Ilyusha, that’s going to get you a fourth term! ”
 “Don’t t! ” Ilya Iosifovich dismissed him. “Nineteen twenty-two. The year they deported all the professors. Not that many, around six hundred, it seems. But again: the select! The best of the best! With their families! The country’s otential. Further: the anteasants, also the best, the hardest working. And their children. And their unborn children as well. People dear and take their genes with them. They remove them from the gene pool. Party repressions knock out whom? Those who have the courage to express theoint of view! The honest ones, that is! The most honest! Preriod. . . The bearers of moral values, teachers and educators. . .”
 “But at the same tle, no? ”
 “I won’t deny that. But allow me to poresents less danger than a revolutionary one,” Goldberg noted with a haughty smile. “Let’s keep going. World War II. Exemption from military service is granted to the elderly and the infirm. They’re the ones given an extra chance of surviving. Prring. Do you sense the degree of deformation? Now let’s add to that Russia’s famous alcoholism. But that’s not all. There ortant consideration. We’re constantly drocess, whether it has its own goals. Wtionally effective mechanism of directed evolution. Insofar as the evolutut the question as follows: which qualities offer the individual greater chances of surviving? Brains? Talent? Honor? A sense of self-esteem? Moral resolve? No! All of these qualeded survival. The carriers of these qualities either left the country or were systematically exterminated. And which qualities facilitated survival? Caution. Caginess. Hypocrisy. Moral irresolution. Lack of self-esteem. Overall, any ut him at risk. Gray, average, C students, so to speak, found themselves at an advantage. Take a Gaussian distribution. Remove the center, the area of more pronounced carriers of any quality. Now, takle. And you say? ”
 “In vhere these days—five to seven years,” Pavel Alekseevich commented.
 Ilya Iosifovich laughed.“That’s what I’ve been saying: the nation has become flatter, the chimney lower, the smoke thinner. . . Before it would have been worth ten to fifteen. . .”
 Pavel Alekseevich always liked his friend’s wit and fearlessness, although inside he often disagreed with the results of his high-keyed mental work. The brutal picture of national degeneration Ilya Iosifovich had drawn demanded verification. Pavel remembered perfectly hrofession. Among the people who visited their house there had been military men, lawyers, and writers. . . He had to admle of the same intellectual level. . . But that didn’t mean that they didn’t exist. . . They could exist—in secret, without announcing their existence. . . “No, no, that’snonsense,” Pavel Alekseevich cut himself short. That only supports Ilyusha’s idea: don’t stick out, hide in a corner, and that means denying your own identity. . . A serious objection lies somewhere else. . . Of course, with children. In newborn children. Each is marvelous and unfathomable,like a sealed book. Goldberg’s ideas are too mechanistic. Accordulate theworld. . . Rubbish! Each resents the entire human race. When you come down to it, Goldberg himself wrote a whole book about genius and should have noticed that genius, that rare miracle, can be born of a fisherman, a watchmaker, or a dishwasher. . .
 The natural greatness of mountaasses all, even the most outstanding, human discoveries. You can sweat, pant, stand on your toes, and strain yourself to the limit, but all you’ll get is a mere reflection of the true law. Of course, those hundred thousand genes are a great puzzle. But that puzzle does not contaortion of it. Its enterimental herd. . .
 Pavel Alekseevich said something of the sort, in short, to Goldberg, but the latter resisted.
 “Pavel, human beed being governed by the laws of nature long ago. A very long time ago! Already today certarocesses are regulated by humans, and within a hundred years, I assure you, humans will learn how to change the climate, control heredity, and discover new forms of energy. . . Soved, the lost genes reintroduced. And, arents’ genome! ”
 “It wouldn’t be a bad idea to ask the child.” Pavel Alekseevich frowned.
 Ilya Iosle things? Why derfections of a marvelous design?
 “When are you going to resurrect the dead? ” Pavel Alekseeved.
 “Not yet, but lectancy will increase at least twofold. And people wassion. All holemics they lacked something. . .
 “Maybe twy? No, no, that kind of world is not for me. Then like Ivan Karamazov, I’ll return my ticket. . .”
 Father and daughter, stepfather and stepdaughter, had not grown so far apart from each other after all.
 4
 Elena’s Second Notebook
 I NEED TO JOT DOWN MY NOTES AT THE SAME TIME EVERY day and to tell Vasilisa to remind me. I used to keep a notebook leared to. For absolute certain I hid it somewhere, but I don’t remember where. I tried looking for it, but couldn’t find it anywhere. I remember well what ose school notebook on some subject that Tanya had started and then abandoned. Light blue.
 Today my head is clear, and my thoughts are in order. Sometimes there are days when I can’t think a single thought to the end and I lose it. Or I lose words, and everything is filled with black holes. What a disaster!
 At first the doctors thought that I had some sort of disease that affected the blood vessels in my brain. Then PA took me to the Burdenko Instaratuses. PA didn’t leave me for a second, and he looked so lost. He’s too good for words. There, at the Burdenko Instening to them. It turned out that y not to have found one. Of course, there wasn’t supposed to be one. I am absolutely sure that there’s nothosite, something necessary is missing. A psychiatrist examined me as well. He also found no disease. Stent a month and a half on sick leave, then went back to work. Everyone was very glad to see me, Galya and Anna Arkadievna as well. Galya had been doing all my work and says that she’d had a rough time. Kozlov brought hy. As always, I found lots of mistakes in his work. It’s just amazatial imagination.
 I feel best at my drafting board: I don’t forget anything, and my work, as always, consoles me.
 Tanechka of late has become more kind. Although basically nothing has changed: she isn’t looking for work and quit the university. PA says that I shouldn’t pester her about that. He says that she’s an intelligent girl and we should trust her judgment. Yesterday (or the day before? ) Tanya dropped in on me in the evening when I was already in bed. She kissed me, sat down on the bed, and asked if I remembered how we had all gone to Timiryazevka to ride the horses. We spent a long time recollecting that winter day. I remember all the detaing. (He’d forgotten ht asking us to turn away, blowing his nose soldier-style between his two fingers. Wy we were in those days! I remember perfectly all the detaurebred black horse with the small head. Only I couldn’t remember its name, and Tanya reminded me: its name was Arab. I don’t remember why PA was so cheerful that day. He still didn’t drink then.
 No, that’s not right. I’m mrecisely the year he started to drink. He keeps worrying about my health, but he ought to think about himself. He can’t drink that much at his age. But I can’t say anything to him. Still he’s the best. Despite the fact that we’ve lived as if we’vebeen divorced for ten years. Or not divorced?
 Another memory sl again. This time at work. During lunch I was in the cafeteria. I was eatieces of something that I had no idea what to do with. . . I came to, like last time, the next day in my bed. Then Anna Arkadened to me. I stayed in the cafeteria with my salad until the cafeteria lady said thatit was time for her to close, but I didn’t answer her. She even got scared. And so on. Anna Arkadievna didn’t call an ambulance, but got a cab and drove me home. She says that I was very obedond to questions.
 PA resigned me from my job. He speaks very tenderly to me, but unnaturally, as with a little child. I have trects everything’s the same. I am not ening to me. I really can’t go to work in this condition, but I would like to get work from the institute to do at home. We have an arrangement for people who work at home. Otherwise, I’ll just be bored. It’s not l together. So he and I made an agreement.
 Yesterday Tomochka salanning on entering trade school. Good girl! She’s also very tender with me.
 Thiece of bread with cheese, and then forgot and went back to the kitchen to have breakfast. Vasilisa yelled at me, saying that I got in the way of her making dinner. I said that I wanted to have breakfast. She said that I had already eaten breakfast. What a nightmare! I’m turning into an old woman who never walks away from the refrigerator, like Anna Arkadievna’s crazy mother-in-law. I’m going to have to write down what I did and didn’t do.
 I ate breakfast. I ate dinner. I worked after dinner. The doctor from the polyclinic came by. It’s cold in my room.
 I ate breakfast (or was that yesterday? ). PA came home and scolded me for not takills. Now Vasills three times a day because I forget. That’s very funny. It would be hard to find anyone less suited for that assignment. Today she woke me at six in the morning—to take my medicine. “My dear, why so early? ” I asked her. “Later I’ll be busy and forget! ” It’s so funny you want to cry! This isn’t a family; it’s a madhouse. Poor PA, what wen to him if I lose my memory entirely?
 I ate breakfast. I couldn’t remember  or not. I went to wash up, but my towel was wet. That means I’d already washed. There was d and chicken for the main dish. Was there chicken yesterday too? And the day before?
 They brought my drafting table from work. It fills half my room. I asked if it couldn’t be moved. It turned out that they had brought it last week. I was amazed. I didn’t tell them the worst of it: it turns out that I had already done some work, drafted something, but I don’t remember a thing. And it would be awkward to ask. I’m trying hard to behave correctly. Because I’m afraossible. I watch TV more. Readleasure. I p my old volume of Tolstoy. It’s probably the only readress me. I knowhis work so well that I don’t have to strain.
 Today my head tionally clear. I had Vasilisa change my bedding. She has never liked to change bedding. If you don’t remind her, she’ll never do it on her own. I took a bath and washed my hair. While sitting in the tub I remembered a recent dream with an enormous amount of water in it. Suddenly I realed remembering them. I have to try to write everything down.
 PA sat with me for a long while in my room. I feel so good with him. He sly sat down in the armchair next to me and said nothing. Then he took me by the hand and played with my fingers for the longest time. I love him very much. He probably knows that.
 I ate breakfast. I took my pills. I ate dinner. Kozl. has two mistakes in his drafts. It’s much more plesnt working with constructors. They have mch more competent staff.
 It turns out it’s already May. I must start writing down the date. Otherwise, time is like mush. PA said that he wants to rent a dacha. That seems excessive to me. What does he imagine: Vasilsa and I will move there, and he’ll come to visit on Saturdays and Sundays, and the girls, who knos if they’ll come even once the whol summer. And who’s goartment in Mocsow. Vasilis’s also against it. She left for some prayer servart. Only in the evening PA came home and life begagagan. One day I didn’t even get otuof bed. Everythots are, or where. . . Or maybe I sly forgot?
 I ATE BREAKFAST. AND SO ON.
 Vasilisa sad that she’s leaving for Ss. Peter and Paul day. The twelvth July?
 Strangers. More strngers. Why are so many strangers cming here?
 someone died DIED
 I don’t understand, but rtment. Everything is different. A long cordor.
 Tanya came by today. Or Toma. No, it was Tan. She’s beautiful.
 No one home. Yesterday no one. TANYA PA
 Vasilisa gave me tea
 BREAKFAST DINNER SUPPER
 PA sa. Three days. Vasilisa dosn’t give me breakfst.
 BREAKFAST Nothing hurts. Nothing thing hurts. DIED who
 TANYA TANYA TANYA TANYA
 HOSPITAL BREAKFAST NO
 PAVEP A PV PA
 WHITE brkfast
 Happning awfal ask PA WHERE
 WPER WHER WRE HERWHERWH
 I Elena Grgeva N Kukts 1915 PA who ded de tnya
 5
 ILYA IOSIFOVICH’S WORK GREW LIKE A TREE: THE OLD AT the roots, the new in the branches. With many, many new offshoots. Anthropology, evoluthy, statistics, and even history all came in handy, everything went into the mix, and everything was made to work. Ilya Iosoet. Sometleasant muscular fatigue that occurs after a mountain hike or skiing. Beserties of nations.
 He cast hart of his catch. The grandness of hart overseen by, the organs of state security, which had slightly relaxed during the Thaw. It was here he performed as an oet in the Romantic sense of the word. Pavel Alekseev review.
 “Ilya, you may have some oints, but you get too carried away, like some David Garrick. . .”
 Goldberg could not contarocess. In the slrocess. A convecies. At rogressive, but in the concrete historical situation it functioned as a negative factor.
 Her.
 Other papers also exresentations. Fecially talented staffers in his laboratory on the No. 110 bus. . . L to Novosibirsk. The graduate student had reported on the work of Novosibirsk geneticist B on the “domestication” of silver foxes, animals that were both aggressive and dangerous. It turned out that w decline in the quality of their fur, and having become obedient and trusting, the foxes began to bark like dogs. Thus, the only foxes suited to adorn the collars of generals’ wives were those who failed to conform to good relations with human beings. Foxes that behaved badly. Those that learned to lose.
 Captaecialist, he was invited to serve in the security system in the section that oversaw the sciences. The work of the Novosicious about it.
 Consresentations contained the following statements made by him: “I ask you to note that what we have here is a reverse correlation between acquiescence and fur quality. Wherson, the less valuable he is as an individual. . .”
 Thrison terms rubbed Seslavin the wrong way. At one time there had been Weissmanites and Morganites at his veterinary institute, who had been dealt with accordingly, and the students were taught Marxist-Leninist biology, with its grass-rotation system and without any of that bourgeois heredity stuff. Because existence, as they say, determines consciousness. Had Seslavs straighten out his crooked consciousness. But there were no orders from above. . . Ilya Iosiled his dossier on Goldberg.
 Both turned out to be hardworked to achieve their desired results. For ths de ballet.
 Captaher. Hromised to think about it. The frivilege they accorded Seslavin. An expertain. But the demon of sction. The sheer mass of Goldberg’s loquacossible for Seslavin to insert any questions. Goldberg was extraordowerful organization to his side. . . Hs had taught Ilya Iosifovich nothing, absolutely nothing.
 At 9:30 P.M. Seslavression, it turned out that Goldberg had not succeeded in acquiring a new ally. Just the opposed nodding understandingly and snarled.
 “Here’s the deal. You can work with flies as much as you want: that’s none of our business. But all those ulation—you’re going to bring them here first,” he knocked on his desk, “and if you don’t, you’re going to be in major trouble. . . You’re better off not arguing with us, Ilya Iosifovich. . .”
 As Goldberg delartment was drawing to an end. Arrile of shit lay in the middle of a room. . .
 It looked lerature of the Thaw. But because he had already receerate, and Goldberg had demonstrated it: he had brought them what they had told him to.
 Thected direction: an audit of the laboratory’s financial records was to be carried out. Over the past two years of er for writing maleficent essays, glassware,chemical reactants, et cetera, et cetera. . . Offonsibility. . . An Academy auderwork, getting in everyone’s way. For two weeks thers. And dug up enough for a laughable accusation of embezzlement. Freared without a trace. Whrosecutor’s office. Ilya Iosast, should have taken a moment to reflect, but his recklessness was so great that he realized what hit him only on the day of the hearing when he found a delayed summons in his mailbox in the morning. Even then he failed to realize what sort of threat hung over him. The hearutation of a human-rights advocate. The lawyer fretted, having recognized the enemy’s trademark.
 “Under no ctive lawyer advised. “Your best bet ermission to take a sick leave, and then we’ll think. They are obliged to reschedule the hearing. . .”
 Ilya Iosifovich did not go to court, but he also had no intention of going to the clinic: he felt uncomfortable taking sick leave when he was healthy. However, the morning of the next day, at 9:00 A.M., a visitor with the unmistakable look of a gumshoe awaited him at the lab and introduced himself as an investigator. The embezzlement case quublic censure. . .
 The scheme was clever, but failed. Pale and teary-eyed, Natals. He was taken under guard directly from the courtroom before the eyes of his stunned and indignant staff.
 Goldberg’s book was already at the typesetter’s, but neither the author nor Seslavin’s organization knew anything about it. For Goldberg, who had managed yet one more t north to all-too-familiar territory lay ahead. . .
 6
 TWO YEARS HAD PASSED SINCE TANYA HAD LEFT HOME, larents near Zvenigorod, or in caretaker quarters her janitor-caretaker girlfriend inhabited on Molchanovka Street. . .
 The last six months a jeweler friend, Nanny Goat Vika—an enormous, unattractive woman with an aristocratic surname and commoner’s manners—had sheltered her. She was a cool woman, and Tanya lrentice. As befrentice, she did the housework and ran errands. Nanny Goat’s studartment in a new construction area. Her fam, and that not every night. Tanya settled herself ensive old furniture rescued from local trash bins.
 Nanny Goat had hands of steel, a heart of gold, and the mad sensibilities of a truth-seeker. Ages ago she had graduated from radlace on a circuit board. After havrofession. She had a ton of work: fle earrings. . . After a whieces. She went to study with a famous jeweler, an artist, and owing to a confluence of various strange circumstances, including those related to housing, married him. A few years later he left her, pregnant, but w. Along weared to no one knew where during the day. Tanya, however, now knew where they spent the daytime, which was so dangerous for them: in shelters like Vika’s studio. . . Tanya came to love the vle she had met at the university and in the laboratory, in stores, and at the conservatory. She learned to d at Vika’s studio.
 “Our klanations on the subject were necessary. What precronoun entail? Neower. In order to be “our kutting things together. . . In a word, that sense of Russermissive Twentieth Party Congress. . . Those who studrecisely which reason they remained in the category of “clients.”
 “Our kend the night either with Nanny Goat or with Tanya, however the cards fell. “Our-kersonal sexual attraction. Occaslementation of certain unwritten rules. Nanny Goat herself was a busated all sentiment from her own life and successfully trained Tanya to do the same. Tanya larties.
 Overall, Tanya’s apprentlined hands readily and joyously acquiring new skills and techniques. She would extract an ress it through rollers. Then she pulled it through a wire rolling mill, out of which emerged new thin silver wire. . . The work was not compledant, had once taught her. Tanya worked wly into millimeter-sized wire. Now Vortant stage of jewelry making, soldering. Here Nanny Goat Vrofessor. Although she werature of the melted solder, Tanya never achieved Vika’s level of mastery. On the other hand, she quickly mastered the torch: with a deft and lightning-fast movement of her left hand she raised the versatile flame to shoulder level and affixed it to the stand. She never once burned herself. Tassed, and Tanya began to learn how to do settings. She almost wore her thumb down to the bone wiece for sale. But ealed to Tanya that her hands—which she used to care for, growing long nails that she manicured—were now covered with grazes and scars of varying degrees of newness, just like a boy’s. . . She turned body and soul toward masculartment store, threw out her bras, and gave Toma all her blouses with their round collars and lacy inserts sewn to her mother’s taste. . . A unle on the street would address her as “young man,” which she also liked. Even Tanya’s gat with a swagger to her shoulders. . .
 She had already turned twenty-two, but seemed to be experiencing her teenage years anew. Although her nocturnal sorteace with one of her grandmothers, and argue with the other. Relatassionate kisses. On return new sources of energy in her.
 Tanya visited her own family infrequently. She usually arrived toward evening. The apartment, which had once been very light, now seemed gloomy at all times of day. Tomochka’s tropical vegetation consumed the light. The place was dusty and faded; only the ever-green leaves Toma was never too lazy to wonge gleamed with a waxy shimmer. Her mother, sed itself to her lightweight body, rustled the woolen yarn thatshe either knitted—her knitting needles tinkling rhythmically—or undid with a quiet electric-like whirr. Balls of old wool covered with knots and the tails of knots turned softly at her feet. Two strt floor.
 Tanya would siano stool. Elena Georgily smiled when she saw Tanya.
 “My little girl, I wanted. . .” Elena began to say, but did not finish her sentence.
 “What, Mommy? ”
 Elena fell sassing desire. Unlted somehow to hide this terrible condition from those around her.
 “Would you like me to bring you some tea? ” Tanya offered the first thing that came into her head.
 “I don’t want tea. . . Tell me. . .” And once again she fell silent.
 “What are you knitting? ” Tanya made a new attempt at communicating.
 “Here. . . I’m knitting this for you. . . ,” Elena answered in confusion and smiled guiltily. “I undid it a bit. . .”
 Elena did not know what she was knitting. When her work turned  and knit the collar, she would become confused, undo the whole thing, and start all over again. . . Tanya quossibility of communicating: her mother, of course, was sick, but her sickness was something very bizarre. . . A kind of slow deterioration. . .
 “Do you want to go for a walk? ” Tanya offered.
 Elena looked at her in fright:“Outside? ”
 Followed going out. It was difficult for her even to leave her own room. When she needed to make her way to the washroom or the k a cat, because the cat’s warmth would lend her a sense of balance. Thoughts of the world that lay beyond the confartment evoked a wild terror in her. She was ashamed of thted to hide it.
 “Not today,” she would say childishly, and searched with her eyes for one of the Murkas. Her helpless and almost infantile intonation and convulsive searching for a cat flustered Tanya as well.
 “Tell me something. . .” Elena asked vaguely.
 “About what? ” Tanya hossible for her to tell anything about her current life.
 Elena smathetically.“About something. . .”
 Thes. . . But there was food in the house: in the evenings Toma would bring home what she had managed to grab between work and her evening classes.
 Then her father would arrower, emanated aging and decline. . . Howerful and magnetic, had grown exhausted, and Tanya felt uncomfortable looking at him: it seemed as if he had committed some shameful act and wanted to hide it.
 Pavel Alekseevly furrowed, as if his skin had become a size larger. He was happy to see Tanya, and at fity. He suffered, lle who understood each other no longer existed between them. . .
 Vasantry. She felt so sure of herself in the kitchen that her blindness was almost not noticeable. She set the table, warmed up soup for Pavel Alekseevlate. . . She made her way around the apartment by runner. She moved soundlessly on the mended soles of her old felt boots, and reserved her village smells—a combination of sour milk, hay dust, and even, it seemed, a whiff of smoke from a wood-burning stove. . .
 Her parents’ house depressed Tanya and saddened her. She rarely ran  cookies.
 At the end of February Tanya had her first sale: she made real money for real work. Farent black smoky quartz, a tender oval stone she had worked on for two days. At one tresents for everyone.
 She borrowed a shoppedigree goods from the Arbat—Indian tea, cakes, cookies. For some reason that day they had put on sale a rare shment of English cosmetics and German cigarettes. She bought those as well. She bought her father a bottle of Armenreferred vodka. But cognac was classier.
 She was met by Pavel Alekseevich, who had already consumed his evening dose. He pressed her head in its gray rabbit fur fitfully to his chest and winced.
 “Tanya, there’s been such trouble. . . They beat up Vitalik Goldberg. Genka came in from Obninsk and called. I just came back from the Sklital. His condition is serious. I talked to the doctor. He has a skull fracture. His arm is broken, his nose too. He still hasn’t regained consciousness. . . Ilyusha’s book has come out in the States. . . It’s a mess. . .”
 Tanya did not even set the heavy bag on the floor, but just stood there in the doorway, stunned by the news. Although of late she had hardly any contact with them, the Goldberg boys were more relatives than friends.
 Tanya set the bag on the floor and began to cry. Pavel Alekseev and heavy jacket off his daughter.
 “The KGB? ” Tanya suddenly asked soberly.
 “Looks like it. He got pounded by professionals. They didn’t want to kill. If they had wanted to, they would have.”
 Vaslace in the corridor near the corner between the kitchen and the entrance hall, and seemed to be looking in their direction.
 “Tanya, is that you? ”
 “It’s me, me, Vasya. I brought presents.”
 “Presents? For what? ” Vasilisa was amazed. It was Lent, hardly the tresents.
 “I bought you some Armenened between them.
 “Let’s go see Momma, and then you and I will drink some of your cognac. Okay? ” Pavel Alekseevosed and nudged Tanya in the direction of her mother’s room.
 “Did you tell her about Vitalik? ” Tanya asked er.
 Pavel Alekseevich shook his head:“We shouldn’t.”
 They sat together, the three of them, for the first time in several years. Elena in her armchair, Tanya on her bed, which smelled either of cats or stale urine. Pavel Alekseevich drew closer, together with his round stool.
 “So should we have a little drink, girls? ” he asked buoyantly, then suddenly stopped short. Elena looked at him with horror.
 “Have a drectedly, instantly bringing her cognac in from the corridor.
 Pavel Alekseevich went to get glasses.
 “Do you think that. . . Is it true. . . Pavel Alekseevich says. . .” Elena uttered uncertarotest.
 “Mom, one glass. . .”
 Pavel Alekseevich stood in the doorway with three unmatched wineglasses. It turned out that Lenochka had not forgotten everything on earth: she had just remembered that her husband was an alcoholic. The sight of the bottle made her nervous for her husband. . .
 “It’s good for you, Lenochka. It’s good for your circulation.” Pavel Alekseevich grinned.
 Elena extended her hand uncertainly and awkwardly clutched the wet green wineglass. Her knitting slid off her knees and fell to the floor. Murka Jr. pawed it immediately. Elena got upset, the willed out.
 “Look, Tanya. . . It’s all fallen down. . . Like that. . . Wet. . .” She was not able to put down the wlicated a sequence of actions. . . Pavel Alekseevlaced it on the bed. He poured for himself and for Tanya.
 “To your health, Mommy.”
 Elena moved the wineglass in the air in front of her, Tanya leaned the glass toward her mouth, and she drank it. They sat together for almost an hour, silent and smiling. They slowly drank the cognac and ate the cakes. Then Elena suddenly uttered completely coherently and doken for years already:“What a nice evening it is today, Tanechka. How nice it is that you came home. Pashenka, do you remember Karantinnaya Street? ”
 “What Karantinnaya Street? ” Pavel Alekseevrised.
 Elena smiled, the way adults smile at children who don’t yet understand. “In Siberia, remember? The place you brought us from to the hospital. . . We had a good life there. At the hospital.”
 “We don’t have laced his hand on her head and stroked her cheek. She caught his hand and kissed it. . .
 The strangest then: Pavel Alekseevich could not remember any Karantinnaya Street. But Elena remembered. How could memory be so whimsical? Twenty years spent living together, of which one of them remembered one thing; the other—something else. To what extent had that lent together, if their memories of one and the same thing were so different?
 Gena Goldberg arrived shortly after. He told what little he had found out about yesterday’s incident. H in the entrance to their building. He had been found only erform his athletic feats. Vhone calls.
 “Did they call you? ” Tanya asked.
 “What’s the point of calling me: I’m far away from all that.” Gena seemed to be justifying himself.
 By all appearances the matter appeared to be lles. He had been summoned by the securic was about to be classified as secret. He refused. The secret had been known to the whole world for a long tulations of Yakuts and other tribes had shrunk four times over the last twenty years. All of th of Nations.”
 A bit later Toma arrived. They invited her to drink together with everyone else what was left at the bottom of the bottle. One glass made her drunk and she began to laugh loudly. The evening was ruined. Tanya kut on her Chinese coat, and remembering Vasilisa, went already dressed to say good-bye to her. She entered the tantry and switched on the light. The lightbulb had burned out long ago, but Vasilisa did not know that. She turned her head at the sound of the switch.
 “Tanya? ”
 Tanya kissed Vasilisa on the crown of her head, covered with her black headscarf.
 “Tell me what to bring you? ”
 “I don’t need anything. Just bring yourself,” Vasilisa answered disagreeably.
 “I do come by. . .”
 Tanya walked out into the street with Gena. He wanted to see her home.
 Toma led Elena ants. Toma paroach.
 “Now hold on, Mommy, hold on. We have to change the wet ones. . . You’re making it difficult for me.”
 Then she washed and dritals. Elena was so ashamed that she closed her eyes and just switched off. She had this little, subtle movement called“Imnothere.” Then Toma nudged Elena ahead of her, led her into her bedroom, and tucked her in. After that she called Vasainless, and without shame. . .”
 W blue and now turned smoky gray, Elena looked out from one darkness into another. . .
 7
 AS FOR HER RELATIONSHIP WITH THE GOLDBERG BROTHers all that Tanya could say was that was the way it had turned out. Seted agonizingly for her. Tanya turned out to be a severe test of theosition as monozygotic twins. So said Goldberg’s exact science of genetics.
 The Goldberg brothers woke. If they ulsory addendum to Tanya’s knockout charm. They never spoke about Tanya between themselves, unless to make a statement or indirectly.
 “Let’s go to the Kukotskys’ on Saturday. . .”
 “I bought tickets to the theater for next Sunday. . .”
 And that was the end of the conversation.
 Each of the boys eriority over everyone else around. In the bect. Curly-haetition, if only for thereason that she was two grades behind them in school. There was two years’ dleasures commensurate with their age. . . In passlace, followed, nose to nose, by the brothers, who were breathing down his collar, with everyone else left in their wake. Except Tanya. . . She was beyond. . . to the left or right. Her game was, essent of her thumb and middle finger. . . It was preciano. . . A hierarchy of intelligence turned out thereby not to be the only scale by which values were determined. . .
 From an early age the brothers’ tastes and preferences had been similar, but their mother had known almost from the moment of their birth that one of them, Gena, who was born twenty minutes later—the younger one, that is—cried just a bit harder and laughed just a bit louder. Hlicit. In any case, recisely five-year-old Vitalik, the relatively older one, who would ask Gena: “What kind of cereal do we like more? ”
 And Gena would decreferred buckwheat. . .
 Thelace to Tanya. The school reciate the boys’ talents—A students were all alike. Through the hardshected. In addhysics, chemistry, and mathematics. For Tanya, basores of the Iron Curtain. . .
 Now, after Ilya Goldberg had been arrested and appeared—unlrevious years—to be an innocent suffering hero (it was the middle of the sixties! ), his sons were illuminated by their father’s reflected light. Especially after Vitalka’s nighttime beating in the entranceway. . .
 Tanya and Gena walked out of the Kukotsky apartment a little after eleven o’clock. Gena knew that Tanya was not last year they had not seen or called each other. Tanya seethed wital vigils over him. Gena, for the fassion. Whend the night on Profsoiuznaya Street, in order to be able to rush off to the Sklif first thing in the morning without losing time. . .
 Tanya hes. There was no phone there. Tanya wavered; Gena was resolutely determined. . . Generally speaking, leaving him was not a good idea, and she headed off for Profsoiuznaya Street, where she had never been before.
 The two-room apartment le of hours ago. More accustomed to order than to cleanler that flooded tables and chairs and cascaded in broad waves onto the floor. Footpaths had been marked out among the papers—one to water and another to food, one to the table and another to the bathroom—ws brown from tea stains on the inside and dirty on the outside. Peaceful herds of fattened cockroaches grazed the scastures.
 “How can you live here? ” Tanya, by now used to everything, was amazed.
 “It’s not a problem. For the most part I’m in Obninsk. And Dad and Vitalka are here. But we don’t let anyone artment so as not to scare anyone.” He flashed his big teeth, resembling white beans. “It’s even worse in Malakhovka. When Mama was alive there was some order. How shemaintained it I have no idea. . .”
 “No, no, thossible.” Not yet having removed her jacket, Tanya tried to decide which side they should begin cleaning from. “We’ll start with the kitchen,” she announced.
 The decision turned out to be the right one. There were fewer papers er trash. Multacket of laundry detergent found in the bathroom. The marogress. The effort required was more than Herculean: horse manure could be thrown out blindly.
 From midnight until four thirty in the morning they merrily cleaned four-hand. They chatted, gty. The people who had conducted the quasread in massive layers on all work and nonwork surfaces, had been left untouched. . .
 “Your brother’s strange,” Tanya announced toward the end. “Ilya Iosartment.”
 “You don’t understand: thartment-museum. . .”
 At half past four a couch covered wosits. Tanya collapsed on it, raising a cloud of dust.
 “Enough. T himself waiting. . .
 After spend, continuing all the while to be amazed by this state of acute tenderness and equally acute beastliness. . .
 “Where does that feeling of having done something underhanded, of some sort of guilt, come from? ” he managed to th. A voice within him answered sternly: “She’s your sister, after all. . .”
 Tanya thought of nothoint of sainthood, with an innumerable number of children by café waitresses and academicians’ wives, and no worse and no better than this sweet little friend of hers since childhood. Tanya saw nothrised by her older girlfriends and the way they went crazy over men: in bedall are equal. . . At the time she still did not know that this was not quite so.
 They arrlanned, but toward noon. At f, then Gena reaffirmed his new rights. By that troved and he had regained consciousness and no longer intended to die.
 8
 A YEAR HAD PASSED SINCE A MURKY FILM HAD TOTALLY clouded over Vasilisa’s sole eye and darkness had occluded her vision. Blindness, a misfortune and terrible threat for the elderly, had liberated her from constant labor.
 So began her lawful release from work, beyond which blind Vasilisa envisioned her final unlimited and boundless recumbency. Her constant activity directed outward now turned inward. Before she had prayed to icons. She had several: a dark three-tone Theotokos from Kazan executed  along with it. There was also a Saosite direction. Now rotectors. She stood on her knees ted to resurrect them in her memory, but could not. The darkness that enveloped her hung loints of light whatsoever. Thrayers hung in the stale air near her head and rose neither to the Lord, nor to the Lord’s Mother, nor to God’s saintly miracle workers. Then something like a flickering candle flame began to cut through the darkness. The flame was so weak and so unsteady that Vasilisa feared that it might be some charm of her imagination. But ot, it so gladdened her, that Vasilisa beckoned it from within and tried to hold on to the image of light a bit longer. And the unsteady lrayer. Her prayers now were only about the “little flame,” as she called it, that it not leave her. Even ace alongside Vasilisa’s skinny, cold legs.
 So urchases of food, without washing large loads of hardly soiled laundry, and without enormous deck-swabbing housecleanings—leaving herself only her almost ritual duties of washing Elena in the morning and meeting Pavel Alekseevich after work. The larger part of the day she spent rehensible only to Eastern monks. . . A blend of prayer-farents and the eternally memorable Varsonofy and ending with the nameless faces of the nuns of the N monastery, long ago deceased. . . by the light of that tiny flame that she had learned to fan within herself, as she would a coal in a stove. . .
 Every day, as he accepted from Vasartially restored. He was not some absentmable of turning on a gas burner. He could warm up ht the services of a blind servant was also untenable. . .
 Agaeration. Vasilisa, though, did not want to hear about it, invoking God’s will, which determined everything for her. . . Pavel Alekseevraises of God. . . She shook her head, and then he got even angrlaying the holy fool. . .
 Each time he drank just a bit more than usual, Pavel Alekseevich started in anew with Vasilisa. But no line of reasoning could move her. Then once, Toma, wletely drained, accidentally uttered the only words that would convince her.
 “Look, Aunt Vasya, you’re so strong and healthy you could haul water, but all you do ray. . . Why don’t you at least come with me. . .”
 Despushing her nose to the ground, tirelessly digging and weeding. The blood of the peasant had spoken assion for rhododendrons and choisya.
 She had never liked doing housework, which now required more and more of her time, and now she was enrolled at an evening trade school and in fact very busy.
 For a whole day Vaser—inside her. As always, she thought slowly and ass. Feration.
 “But you drised. “First we need to show you to an oculist. For a consultation. . . Maybe they won’t agree to do it. . .”
 “Why not? I’m agreed. Let them cut. . .”
 The doctors found no contraindications. Two weeks later Vaserated on at the eye institute on Gorky Street. Sing, stood in lines, cooked their food, and did the laundry. Only her step remarecious object—her only seeing eye. Pavel Alekseevich’s words about God’s will effected by the hands of doctors had touched her heart. Although she remembered perfectly the entle, vague and quivering, like trees in the wind, she was constantly reminded of the New Testament story of Christ healing the man blind from birth, and she linked the doctors’ fiddling with her numbed eye with the Savior’s touching of the young blind man’s dead eye.
 No one ed and begun to see. The inner light that had illuminatedher in times of total blindness had left her, and now, in her restored sightedness, she could not see it at all. She longed for her lost “lorarily resurrected eye would once again go out.
 Havart of her life. Only after havid, and ignorant Vasilisa. She began to respect that same Vasersonal love. . . Now she knew for sure that the Lord God set her apart from the enormous human multitude. . .
 A completely new, outlandt into her head: that God loved her even more than others. . . Take Tanya: beautaces, and not out of need, but of her own free will. . . Or Pavel Alekseevosing, famous man, the doctor of all doctors. How many children had he done away with: countless numbers, over his head in sin. Plus he drank, like a lowlife loser, like her deceased brother, God be with him. . . There was nothalm of your hand. Kassionate, she felt sorry for every last cat, but had forgotten about Flotov! Wasn’t that on her conscience? What else was God punishing her for? He’d taken away her mind and all her senses. She lived like an animal. . .
 Vasilisa now treated Elena condescendingly, like a domesticated animal that needed to be fed and cleaned. . . She spoke wroval or discontent. . . No, there was nothing to discuss here—if the Lord had singled out anyone, it was she, Vasilisa. First He had taken her eye away, and then returned it. . . How else could you make sense of it?
 9
 TANYA WENT TO THE HOSPITAL EVERY DAY AND ASSISTED Vitalka with his needs, from bathing to eating. Hages was a challenge. . . He somewhat exaggerated hricious. Every day, wital. Frile ofmoney, and Tanya translated it into various culinary delicacies. Her workouts at the stove entlaced her exercises in jewelry-making. Tanya dropped ad—everything she owned.
 Every Saturday Gena came in from Obninsk. They would eat supper, drital. The chened to fall into their casual embraces. . . Nature had proverfluous words occurred between them. . .
 Vital for a month and a half. Hlex. His broken nose was reset, the new one no worse than the old, and his concussion also was nothing out of the ordinary, but his broken elbow required some serious tinkering. They performed one operatseudarthrosis. The doctors had to perform a second operation, after which the joint lost all flexibility. Earticular brand of bad luck had been at work.
 Be what may, they released harty for close friends to mark the occasion. The next Saturday, as usual, Gena arrived from Obninsk. Vitalik had been home three days already. Crosslaced. He was madly drised. He looked Tanya right in the eye, but she felt not the least discomfort. The three of them ate dinner together. On the table there was a fat yeasty pie that breathed warmth and homey comfort. Tanya served Varently, had had a stroke of luck. He also wondered whether his brother understood that he had stolen his lover. . .
 Meanwhending the night at home.
 “Besrobably have things to talk about without me hanging around. . .”
 The brothers indeed had things to talk about. The laboratory their father had directed had been closed because of those mythical financial violations. Goldberg sen. What worrarticular. She had already been fosition of any sort. A letter from Goldberg to his sons had arrived several days earlier. The letter contahrases about his love for their deceased mother, and an abasheddeclaration of his intention of marrying.
 Obved off. Most lrison. V. Precroblem. He would say nothossible.
 “I don’t want to cause anyone any needless concern, my dears, but I ask you to take throach a lawyer with this question would be unbearablyhumiliating.”
 “She’s our age? ” Vot in the letter Gena read aloud.
 “She’s only two years older than us. Maybe three.”
 “Our stepmother.” Vitaly smirked.
 Viness bestowed on him, would have liked to inform his brother that he himself was ready to get married, but he held his tongue. They had competed for Tanya for too long—almost their entire conscious lifetime—for him to just come out and announce his dazzling victory, which signified simultaneously the unconditional defeat of his other. He even felt pain for his brother, almost as if he were Gena. For the treferred him did not concern Vitalik. She had turned out to be an unexpected prize following everything he had undergone. But, ults in order to win her, he would have agreed to them willingly.
 Gena had the advantage of having been first, but he was not talking. Probably, Vassionate weekend nights, from Saturday to Sunday, here with Tanya. . .
 In keepoken agreement between them, they did not talk about Tanya. But they did talk at length about their father and his endless and old-fashioned naïveté. And about his courage. And about his talent. And about his honor. And about how lucky they were to have such a tremendous father.
 Then, Gena, as the elder, took action. In the evenartment head the next day.
 At eleven o’clock, after shutthrase from their childhood: “It’s us, the Goldberg brothers. . .” Tanya, however, was not at home. She had not been there at all that evening. . . She was sose. . . Vhanes, and Thomas Mann, while Tanya drank Georgian wine and grimaced. . .
 “They’re like brothers to me. We grew up together. I love them both.”
 V and down as on a scale.
 “So take them both. Only together. That’ll be a high.”
 Tanya looked at her seriously as if at a mathematics lesson.
 “You know, that’s a thought. It’s not the hecially. But at least no one would feel left out. . . And it would be honest.”
 Vika doubled over with laughter.
 The next Saturday Gena did not come in from Obninsk. Tanya barely managed to get through to hhone. He informed her dryly that he was extremely busy and unable to visit in the foreseeable future. She quickly gathered her things and set off for Obninsk. March was in its final freezing days, and Tanya froze numb in the suburban train. She searched a long time for the dormitory and found it only near evening. Gena she found in bed: he had an awful cold and was covered with two blankets and someone’s old overcoat. The room was desperately cold; water spilled on the windowsill had turned into an icy crust.
 “My poor, poor boys,” Tanya mumbled, warming Gena’s hands on her breast. He had a temperature of just under 102 degrees, and an.
 “You’re frozen to the core.” Gena laughed, havossible.
 “Yes,” Tanya agreed. “Thoroughly. But you’re very hot.”
 Gradually theeratures balanced out.
 Gena went to the communal kot. He had an immersion heater, but the high voltage blew out the fuses. The entire dorm was heated with electric ranges and heaters.
 They drank their tea. There was no food, and no place to buy any. The half-empty stores had closed long ago. They warmed each other up again. Toward morning Gena asked Tanya if she wanted to make a choice.
 “I’ve already made one,” Tanya answered seriously. “I’ve chosen the Goldberg brothers.”
 “There are two of us.”
 “I know that.”
 “And? ”
 “And nothing. I don’t see any difference. You or Vitalka, it’s all the same. . .” Tanya waved her arms. “Essentially, I love your father a lot too.”
 Gena sat up from hillow.
 “You can leave our father out of it. He’s engaged.”
 “I’m not making claims on anyone. . . You’re the one who’s insisting that I make a choice. You also have an out, by the way: you can tell me to leave.” Tanya laughed.
 He pressed her head to his bony shoulder and fluffed the short hair on the back of her head.
 “Remember how we used to visit you in Zvenigorod? When we’d go down to the river. . . And go boating. . . And play badminton. . . And then you grew up and turned into a bitch.”
 “What? ” Tanya was surprised. “Why a bitch? ”
 “Because it makes no difference to you who you screw.”
 Tanya stirred, making herself more comfortable.
 “It does make a difference. There are some I’d never sleep with, not for anything. But with the Goldberg brothers—anytime.”
 “I’ll think about it. Maybe I’ll let Vitalka have you.”
 “It’s prec. . .
 Gena was st. My. Apparently, he needed to talk not with her, but with his brother. Only about what?
 10
 AT ABOUT THE SAME TIME A STRANGE LETTER ARRIVED addressed to Elena Georgievna. Vasers. She brought it to Elena. Elena took the offed into her room. She handed him the letter.
 “Here. Please. . . An envelope. . . For Tanechka. . .”
 Pavel Alekseeve. It bore the  of INIURKOLLEGIA. The pale letters prelled out that the International Legal Collegium writes to inform of its search for the heirs of Anton Ivanovich Flotov, who died January 9, 1963, in an oncological clinic in the city of Buenos Aires and bequeathed half of his estate to his wife, Elena Georgievna Flotova, and to his daughter, Tatiana Antonovna Flotova. The offlete information about the status of her daughter Tatiana Pavlovna Kukotskaya. . .
 Pavel Alekseevut the letter on the table and walked out. The news was mind-boggling. Accorderished during the war, but somehow had made his way to South America, where he died twenty years later. What worr, nor the information about some mythical inheritance. . . What had crashed down on hart.
 In his office he sat down at his desk, having forgotten for a moment what he had come for. Automatulled out a half-bottle of vodka and small—“just the right size,” as he liked to say—glass and drank. A minute later everything was clear. Rerson besides Elena who had known Flotov. Hset the entire set of lies. His heart was crushed, like a finger in a door. He winced and drank the remainder.
 He returned to the bedroom. Elena was surring loudly like an oncoming suburban train and it seemed that at any moment a whistle would blow. Catching sight of Pavel Alekseevich Murka fell silent and tucked her fluffy tail under herself.
 “You know, Lenochka, that letter contains a message about the death of your first husband, Anton Ivanovich Flotov. Accord in South America. . . He died only a few months ago. . .”
 Elena responded brrickles. . . That’s what I thought. They’re prears, right? ”
 “What prears? ” Pavel Alekseevich became alarmed.
 Elena absentmindedly gestured with her arm, confused.
 “You won’t tell anyone, will you? ”
 “About what? ”
 She smathetic smile and grabbed the cat the way a child grabs the hand of its nurse.
 “They’re huge, wrickly thorns, on the reddish earth. . . And there was a horseman, that is, first he didn’t have a horse. . . Now I think that it was him. . .”
 “You didn’t dream that? ”
 She smiled a condescending smile, like an adult to a child.
 “What are you talking about, Pashenka! It’s more likely that you’re a dream for me.”
 Elena had not called him Pashenka for a long time. Elena had not spoken with such a firm voice for a long, long time. Ever seech was that of inquiring doubt. Does thanied by a sense ofderealization. . . What was this? Pseudo-memories? Hypnogogic hallucinations?
 He took her by the hand.
 “And where did you see those cactuses? ”
 She grew confused and upset.“I don’t know. Maybe in Tomochka’s room. . .”
 Pavel Alekseevich took the letter in hand and ran his eyes across it one more time. Why at the mention of the death of her first husband had she started talking about cactuses? There was no connection. Except perhaps mention of Buenos Aires. . . What a peculiar array of associations. And now was she trylying a false argument? The cunning of the mad?
 “Lenochka, Toma hates cactuses. She doesn’t have a single cactus. Where did you see cactuses? Maybe you dreamed them? ”
 She bent her head even lower, practically snuggling the cat, and he saw that she was crying.
 “My little girl, what’s wrong? Are you crying because of Flotov? That all happened a long time ago. And it’s good, isn’t it, that he wasn’t killed. . . Please stop crying, I beg you. . .”
 “Those strickles. . . No, not in a dream. . . Not at all in a dream. . . In a different way. . . I can’t explain it. . .”
 Ones? Dreamlike delusional derangement of the consciousness: is that what it’s called? Fsychiatric literature. The most tenuous, most vague of the medsychiatry. . . Hut Pavel Alekseevich at a loss because he could not understand it. A derangement of consciousness. . . A particularly malicious form of early dementia? Alzheimer’s disease? Pre-senile dementia? What were the limits of this disease? . . . One way or another, though, today had been one of the better days: she was reacting and answering questions. It was almost full-fledged communication.
 “It’s posserson. Thousands of Russian soldiers did not return home, you know that. Perhaps it was all for the better. If he’d returned, they would have sent hs. . .” Pavel Alekseevened with her.
 “No, you don’t understand. . . Flotov was a Baltic German. His great-grandfather was from Königsberg, von Flotow, and he had a lot of relatives who had stayed behind. He hid who he was. . .”
 “What are you saying, Lenochka? That’s sly amazing. . . That means he was one of the guilty? When I was young, everyone t for a few idiots and bastards, knew that they were guilty of something, and they hid who they were. . .”
 “Yes, of course. I remember how I felt it the first time. When my parents took me from my grandmother and brought me to a colony near Sochring of 1920. That’s when I first saw the vegetation in the South. . . And that’s when I understood that somethle. . . A portrait of Lev Nikolaevich Tolstoy hung in the communal dining room. Done ortrait, his bare forehead shining and his beard fluttering in the wind, and, what really annoyed me, the frame was crooked. And no one noticed. . .”
 Pavel Alekseevrecise details. With an analysis of the situation, criticism, and an ability to arrive at meaning. Not a shadow of dementia. There could be no thought of dementia here. . . So why, two hours ago, had she been soon. No, she hadn’t qulest of things. She couldn’t remember what she’d eaten for breakfast. . . If she had even eaten breakfast. . . The pseudodementia. A seemlest skills. A sui generis game of hide-and-seek of the mind with itself. . . No, I could never solve thuzzle. Maybe I should read Freud. In 1912 my dead mother had traveled to Vsychoanalytic sessions with one of Freud’s students. What a shame I know absolutely nothing about that. It seems my mother had some variety of hysteria. . . Pavel Alekseevich frowned. Sid rigidity with which he had rejected his mother’s second marriage, and his mother herself, a fair-haired beauty who had grown old with dignity and died in Tashkent in 1943 from ordinary dysentery.
 Weed of Pavel Alekseevich’s frown and fell silent.
 “Yes, yes, Lenochka. The frame was crooked. . . Tell me more. . .”
 But she had fallen sower. Once again she sank her fingers into Murka’s fur, charged with live, slightly crackling, electricity, and withdrew entirely from the conversation and from the letter that had served as the indirect reason for the conversation, and from Pavel Alekseevich, who just seconds ago she had called “Pashenka”. . . Once agaression of “Imnothere.”
 Pavel Alekseevich knew that no force could bring her back. She would wake up to communicate again in a week, a month, or in a year. Sometimes these glimmers lasted hours, sometimes days. These temporary gly.
 The exact same thtiness and the torturous loss of sensation that afflicted her, about her indescribable confusion at not being able to recognize the world around her. . . And then her speech had stopped in the middle of a word, and she buried herself in the cat.
 “Always the cat,” the thought entered Pavel Alekseevich’s head. “Next time when she begins to talk again, I’ll chase the cat into the corridor. . . How strange: the cat is like a conduit to madness. . .”
 “Lenochka, you and I were talking about Flotov. . .”
 “Yes, thanks much. . . I don’t need anything. . . Yes, everythlease, don’t worry. . .” Lena babbled, addresst room.
 11
 LIKE ALEKSANDR SERGEEVICH PUSHKIN, TANYA WAS MISerable ed out, fatigued, and caught colds that refused to go away. Therable somnolence and aversion to food.
 She was lartment. As soon as hosed staff reduction. He eked out a living as a translator. Lular science magazines. Two short notes of heared inChemistry and Life. Also w of acquaintances.
 Barely able to wt fourteen hours straight. Occasionally coming out of hibernation, she went to Obninsk to see how Gena was doing. He was fercent. Yet, for all his authority and scientific achievements, the adviser was neither tsar nor god, and it was unclear until the very last moment whether or not Gena would be allowed to defend. . .
 Tanya spent a day or so strollle of times again in May to look at the young greenery. The fresh a, thinking little of the fact that Gena lay down alongside her when he returned from the laboratory. Theanied her to the bus, then ran off to his laboratory. . .
 Hav, made a few female calculations she had never before condescended to, and arrived at an interesting conclusion. In the fened, and the discovery at first stunned her.
 Nanny Goat Vain. Durression of total disinterest, as if she were a virgin or an old woman. For her, pregnancy was neither a joynor an affliction, merely an interesting event. After makened to be at hand.
 “Oh you devil,” he rued. “I’m a jerk, of course, but you’re to blame too. . . But a kresent circumstances—that’s too much.”
 “You think so? ” Tanya surprearance of a child. “So should I have an abortion? ”
 Vitalik said nothing. For too long.
 “It seems I don’t want ause turned out to be decisive, because a minute before that Tanya had not at all known what she wanted. “We don’t need a kid,” Vitalik announced rather decidedly. “And my arm doesn’t straletely. . .”
 That was when Tanya suddenly took mortal offense on behalf of her future chlendid eyebrows, and smirked.
 “I’ll have to ask Genka. Maybe he wants it? ”
 Havected this turn of events. It had somehow never occurred to hhew. . .
 “Listen, so who’s the kid’s father? ”
 Having made it a rule never to hide her thoughts and always to tell the truth, Tanya smiled a bit more broadly than usual.
 “The Goldberg brothers, Vitalik. The Goldberg brothers. Under the present circumstances, it seems to me, you won’t have as hard a time dealing with it together.”
 Then, not saying another word, Tanya began to collect her bag. Vitalik, also without saying a word, saw her to the bus that she usually rode to Obninsk.
 Gena’s reactect and mature.
 “I’m completely at your dosal, Tanka. The only thing I can’t do right now is leave Obninsk before I finish this damn dissertation. As for everything else, you call the shots. If you want, you can move here, at least until autumn. If you want to get married, we’ll do that here, not in Moscow.”
 “Why not in Moscow? ” Tanya asked, expecting some catch.
 “I’ll lose two days on my dissertation. I told you, there’s a huge rush.”
 “Ah.” Tanya nodded, satisfied.
 Gena did not mention Vitalka. That pleased Tanya. She was ready to marry one of the Goldberg brothers, and the choice had now been made for her: Genka. . .
 But thlan. When Tanya returned from Obned on him: a notice had come from the draft board. . . It was obvunishing Goldberg senior.
 The answer proposed itself: a draft deferment lay right in Tanya’s belly. All they had to do was get marrolyclinic.
 “If that’s the way it has to be. . . What’s there to talk about, Vitalik? Just keep in mind, though, that my choice of husband is Genka.”
 Vitalik smiled a crooked smile.
 “Are you trying to tell me that ours is going to be a fictitious marriage? ”
 “I dut it that way. But if you want, we can call it that.”
 The rest of the eveneration. Tanya desle Alliance.
 Havarticular family.
 The next day they ran down to the clication. Their wedding was set for the beginning of July. Vitalik did not go to the draft board. As a precaution it was decided that he should leave Moscow for a while. He quickly gathered his things, stuffed his bag with dictionaries, and grabbing half of a German textbook on clinical biochemistry—one of his father’s staffers had shared this sweet morsel of a translation with him—set off for his maternal aunt’s house in Poltava. Without calling or otherwise alerting her. . .
 Everything turned out to have been calculated flawlessly. Two days after Vounding at the door. Tanya admartment. They had come to take Vitalka into the army.
 “The owner’s on a tr. I don’t know a thing. I think he went to the Urals to look for work. . .” was all they were able to extract from Tanya.
 Followregnancy. Not wrecisely with her condition of fullness, contentedness in the literal sense of the word. Usually leasant and wholesome. In the mornent several days a week in Obninsk with Gena. There she would stroll through the woods for hours on end, acquleasant fatigue. Her somnolence was replaced by morning sickness. In the morn later in the day. To Tanya’s great chagrerienced a kind of taut fullness inside her that had nothing in common with the vulgar condition of someone who has eaten two dinners at one sitting. Her breasts, on the other hand, had enlarged notink to brown. Tanya scrubbed them ware breasts for nursing. Gena sucked at her darkened nles. He lles hardened from his touch. Tanya also liked this entirely new sensation.
 Two more notices addressed to Vitaly arrived from the draft board. Some captating to scare her. Tanya played the idiot.
 On rare occasions Tanya would visit her family. She announced that she was pregnant and was planning to get married. But Elena did not react to the announcement at all. It seemed to Tanya that her mother had not heard. But that was not quite true, because in the evening of that same day Elena told her husband that Tanya would give birth to Little Tanya. Accustomed to the chaos of her mental processes, Pavel Alekseev layers of her cortex and she had remembered the time when she herself had awaited a daughter. She was  Tanya.
 The letter from the International Legal Collegium remained unanswered. Elena was inion about the inheritance, let alone answer. And Pavel Alekseevriate moment. For hortant.
 On one of those late l his mind to talk to her about that ill-starred inheritance. He sat her down erated on her and married her soon after she recovered.
 “You moved to my place, Tanya, the very same day that a telegram arrived with information about the death of the man who had been your mother’s husband before me.”
 Tanya’s eyes burst out of their sockets: she had never thought about her mother having been married to someone before Pavel Alekseevich.
 “You were two years old then, Tanechka. Your biological father was Anton Ivanovich Flotov. I adopted you immediately after we got married. Probably I should have told you about this earlier. . .”
 “Daddy, what difference does it make? ” She saw Pavel Alekseevon him at that minute. . .
 She hugged his bald round head, kissed him on his fuzzy eyebrows, and on the nose. She ered: “Who cares about Flotov or Boatov. . . You’re crazy. . . You’re my real, my favorhant, Daddy, you old fool. . . You and I are terribly alike; you’re all the best in me. . . I’m sorry that Iabandoned you. . . I love you terribly, and I love Mama. I just can’t live with you. . . Dad, I’m pregnant, I’m going to give birth to your grandson soon. . . Cool, huh? ”
 He had never had children of his own. He had heard about threcisely to his demiurgic intercession. Hiness, and the future child turned out to be at once both desired and long awaited.
 “My little girl: is it really true we lived to see the day. . . Will I really deliver my own grandson? ” Pavel Alekseevich said in an old man’s weakened voice, and Tanya suddenly saw how he had aged over the last few years, and, moved to tears and immediately angry at herself for that reason,she remonstrated.
 “So why don’t you ask me who I’m marrying? I’m marrying the Goldberg brothers.”
 “What difference does it make? So it’s the Goldbergs. The maart and was always joking that one of the brothers was a tad smarter and the other a tad more handsome, but he always forgot which one was which. . .
 He sensed nothiece of news. For the fromised by the child, who would be his and Ilyusha’s grandson. Wasn’t that a miracle?
 “Here’s the offe. “Your father, Flotov, as we found out not long ago, d in Argentina, where he died not long ago. They’re looking for his heirs.”
 “So, like, he remembered me only after he died? What about earlier? No, Dad, I don’t want anything. I don’t need anythe away and never thought of it again in her life. . .
 12
 IN THE MIDDLE OF JULY THE GOLDBERGS GOT MARRIED: V in Mordovia. At the camp they completed the formalrison marriage. Gena and Toma served as witnesses for Vitalik and Tanya. Toma—ink dress and white shoes on stiff heels—looked like the bride. Tanya had not thought of dressed men’s shirts, and in these shirts the three of them looked like they were all from the same children’s home—shorn short, thin, identically dressed, and the same height, five feet seven inches.
 Toma was dtion, no gifts, and no merrymaking. She wanted grand solemnrecisely what Tanya could not bear. Thelaced the traditionalfleur d’orange. The mental petals forming a lighter-colored halo, “a rarity of rarities”—would remain in Toma’s memory for the rest of her life.
 Vresent. After the newlyweds receregnancy. Together these two documents gave Vitalik the right to a deferral from military service.
 Havassing cab, he and Tanya got in, and they drove off.
 Toma, stunned and unaware of the true state of affairs, asked the melancholic young husband,“Where are they going? ”
 “To Obninsk. She’s plannend the week there. . .”
 Tanya spent not one, but two whole weeks in Obninsk. Back ed in at home. She missed them.
 She found Elena ersuade her to go outside for a walk. Elena was so frathetic and incoherent words.
 “If it wouldn’t be too much to ask. . . Mossibly go there. . . You have to ask Pavel Alekseevich. Isn’t that so? ”
 Tanya was horrified. Her mother’s ossible.
 Later Pavel Alekseevich arrived and was delighted to see both Tanya and her belly, which had just begun to show.
 “Come on, I’ll tell you about our little boy.”
 Neoint.
 She made herself comfortable on the couch, tucked her legs under her, and loosened the button of her jeans. He sat down on a round stool alongside her.
 “So, tell me,” she said.
 “So, now. First of all, I’m certain that he already feels something. Folk belregnancy. That is, he begins to move and to feel simultaneously.”
 “No, I felt a lot earlier that he was running his finger along inside me,” Tanya objected.
 “Well, that means our ler. I’m tellens in the average situation. Your l or down. He’s like this, about a foot long. His head is large and covered with hair, which, if it was light before, has now darkened. He ound and a half. A skinny little thing. And hodermic fat. But he doesn’t need fat right now. He’s covered with down, and the vernix caseosa is already forming. His face has acquired distinct features. He already resembles you, that e he resembles you. But the malace in his nervous system. A very complex program has to set in for his organs to begin working. It’s forming right now. How? I don’t know.And don’t ask. No one knows.
 “There’s a lot I don’t know about what’s taklace in there. But some things I do know. It seems to me that he has already acqurecisely in these last few days his sense of ‘I’ has been born. Hart from the rest of the world. The ‘rest of his world’ is you, my joy. Because until he’s born he’ll know no other world. Wens. Men are never the cosmos. But a pregnant woman—resents the entire enclosed cosmos of another human creature. You know, my dear, ecies of animal where the female would die immediately after giving birth. The cosmos gerfect world? That’s me talking nonsense. He’s floatier, back and forth. Suspended from a moorrobably, as the dense waves come and go, the thick moisture flowing about his sides and his tucked-under legs. They’re crossed, almost ose. And the nails on his feet are already forming. And the auricles of his ears have already formed, but they’re still only skin, without any cartilage. And you know, those little ears of his are big. I wonder if he can hear what we’re talking about. You know, I don’t rule that out. Your mother was certaart of what she knew, even about drafting, she learned before she was born. I can’t say anything of the sort about myself. But then men are much more crudely constructed creatures than women. In berfect creature. I theriences changes of mood. Somety. For example, when you eat somethes.”
 “Can he smile already? ” Tanya ted her father.
 “I don’t think so. The mimetic muscles begin to function later. As a rule, as I’ve observed, fetuses have rather poor and somewhat chaotressions. There ression they have—one of concentration and withdrawal—I know that one very well. . .”
 “And what would gleasure? What do you think? Maybe I should take him to a concert? ”
 “Gleasant for him as well,” Pavel Alekseevich advised his daughter. He could have had no idea in what direction his innocent recommendation would lead Tanya.
 13
 NANNY GOAT INHERITED A FORTUNE FROM THE ELDEST of her aunts and blew it immediately. More precrofile and three yellow diamonds on the lid. The jewelry box was late moderne, ornate, and the embodt of true luxury. The box’s contents, however, were charmrinces.
 The jewelry box brought Nanny Goat broximately one one-hundredth of what it ultimately went for at an auction in London. But Nanny Goat never found out about that, while five hundred rubles were ooh-la-la what a sum of cash. Handed the money d, she took a taxi to the dacha she had rented where her son Misha was stuck with her two remaining aunts and his own grandmother, Nanny Goat’s mother. She paying almost twice the face value—bought train tickets to the South.
 Tanya arrlace the next day in the morning, having missed her cheerful banter. There were stersuaded Tanya to go with her.
 “The troblem. If worst comes to worst, we’ll fartment.” Nanny Goat waved a fat bankroll before Tanya’s nose.
 At eight in the evening they were sitting in the train. An hour later, after all the ting car. Among Nanny Goat’s many talents was the aber crank coffee grinder. .. Tanya’s lean bag held a bathacious dress with enough room for her future belly. She hadn’t even taken a towel, planning to buy one once they got there. . .
 It was not quite clear to her where“there” was. One of the Goat’s customers, an actress, who had dropped raises of the Dniester Estuary, from where she had just returned. Nanny Goat, whlaces that the exiled Ovid had cursed. . .
 Their route took them through Odessa. At a transfer pout them on a bus through Bilhorod-Dnistrovsky to a sandbar between the Dniester Estuary and the sea. . .
 They arrived in Odessa toward evening. Waatterned silk. Next to her the buxom Goat seemed larrow, and the woman immediately took to them with indulging tenderness. She dragged them down to her “ah-paht-ment,” two connected rooms artment that had seen better times. A mtion. The house burst wiling food on the table. . . Llate. Zut him to bed. Like all seaside denizens, she had a stash of folding cots and bedding for the innumerable relatives who came to visit. Whered to Tanya:
 “We’re in for it now. . .”
 But they had no idea what adventures lay ahead.
 L immediately. Zosed that they take a stroll through evening Odessa, because there was no other city like it on earth. . .
 They walked out onto the boulevard submerged under a flood of people, taking in the overabundant denseness of the southern evening, the warm air weighed down by cachinnate voices, and the waves of food and beer lightly seasoned with the smell of vomit. Above all this floated the sounds of Odessa-Soviet radio music—crude thieves’ cant, but not without its own charm.
 The crowd on Derowerful right and left sides, occasionally exchanged glances, barely able to contain their laughter. Never closoke about literary Odessa.
 “We’ll take their Babel and Ilf and Petrov, even Bagritsky and Kataev, and even Margarita Aliger and Vera Inber. If we subtract them, who’s left? Do we need that Sholokhov of theirs? Their Fadeev? Bunin lived here. Even Pushkoke on behalf of Odessa! Right here! ” she proclaectable entrance of the Hotel London. “Here’s where I work. We’ll go through the staff entrance.”
 It was a sailors’ club. International. Hard currency. A nightclub. . . And Mama Zina was in charge of the beer. . .
 “They’re weared from a dark corner. He nodded. They entered the main room. It was alayed quietly. Several saainted working girls sat at a corner table and lushly sucked something through straws.
 People spoke qulace did not smell of fish. Even Mama Zartly faded behind the bar counter. The beer was domestic, but the money was real—hard currency. Not just anyone got hired for this kind of work, only the most trusted. Mama Zartisan and a member of the underground. Here too her watchful party eye insured nothing got out of hand. As for the gital, let them sit here and take a look, have some fun with the sailors, dance a bit. . .
 The picked quietly at some song that was definitely not of the domestic variety, but soulful in its own way. It used to be that Zinaida Nikiforovna did not like this newfangled music, but then it grew on her. They played jazz here.
 The drummer arr his drums. He started to warm up. The really hot one was the one with the horn. But he was running late.
 It grew dark outside, and lights went on in the club. People started show. There was rarely a crowd here.
 Tanya felt more and more ling. The p. Then the horn’s voice rang out. It cut through the piano’s murmur with a dramatic and bitter sound. Tanya turned toward the stage. A not very tall, th as he tried to hold it back. What torturous musainful, bitterly salty, sadly joyous. . . These were hone following Coltrane’s dramatic lead, but at that moment Tanya knew none of this.
 The musrehensible. . . They all played very prechonist was the best of all. . . The wlace her face right under the sound of his horn. . . She drofession. Some creep approached Tanya, and she jolted in fright: no, no. He went away. Nanny Goat conted with his English and Swedish. . .
 “Why d music? Dad was riano; it flows from your fingers; you’re just a container, a mechanism for making the transfer from sheet music to sound. . . I don’t remember why I gave. . . Because of Tomochka, that’s why. . . The Komsomol consciousness of theidiot. . . It wasn’t the right music anyway. Mus. . . That and that,” she thought, nothone and the heartbeat of the drummer. . .
 “Whatever dragged me into that scientific rat’s nest? I could have studied music. . . How expresshone is! I never realized that it had the intonations of a human voice. Or is the musician that talented? Yes, probably the latter. . .”
 The Swede escorted them back to Zlace. The two of them liked each other, but it was clear that this evening would be the end of something that wasn’t even started. He gave Nanny Goat a present, a notepad that already had writing in it, with a black leather cover—really classy. He didn’t have anything else. He wrote hage. Rune Svenson. And that was it. Because the next morn was heading out to who knew where and forever. What a shame!
 They were let. By the t. In the morning she saw her guests to the bus station, and they set off on the flat, dusty road. Serformed by unusual sounding instruments. . .
 Odessa and y road, to fields annihilated by heat, to burned-out corn, and to feather grass. Nanny Goat was the first to get sick: she and her Swedish comrade had got carried away not just dancing, but with an exotic combination of cocktails that wrenched her Russian stomach even without the jolty road. Then l. Tanya held out the longest, but three hours of jostlregnant ones—unglued her as well.
 They crawled out of the bus near a streasant huts turned gray from the dust of orchards and tomato gardens. This miracle of nature was called Kurortnoe,“Resort Town.” Only there was nothing of a resort about it. Just more of the same dusty fields, with the sea nowhere in sight. In short, there was nothing there but heat and ferocious sun. They asked a woman passerby with a bucket full of tomatoes where the sea was.
 “Over yonder,” she waved articular direction. “You lookin’ to rent? ”
 “Yes, to rent.”
 The woman led them toward her place. Along the road they ran into two more women. They stopped and chatted quickly in not quite understandable Russian. After whassed them on to one of the others, and she led them off in a different direction. Sresses came into sight, with something resort-looking behind them. It was a resort hotel, beheared, and the new arrivals were taken to one of them. They rented a separate little house in a garden alongside a wooden outhouse with a tin sink attached with a huge rusty nail to a ridiculous lone wall—all that remained of a demolished shed. Beds of tomatoes stretched around the little house: they were “oxhearts,” a rare variety, huge lilac-crimson beauties, sooner fruit than vegetable. . . Thigs, and chickens. The tomatoes were used to make borscht and jam; they were boaste, dried, and left to rot. As the new arrivals figured out the next day, the local store had no bread, no butter, no cheese, no milk, no farmer’s cheese, no meat, and no lots of other things, but they did sell a low-grade flour, vegetable oil, canned fish, and chocolate candies. . . For the trovided, they set off to find the sea, which they still had not set eyes on and about which their landlady had said, waving in a certain direction, “over yonder.”
 They set out  cliff. The land ended, and the sea began. It lapped—invisible and inaudible—far beneath their feet and merged with the sky in the blinding gray haze seamlessly, without even a hint of a horizon.
 An earthen staosts led to the water. Down it Tanya and Nanny Goat led a recalcitrant Misha, who was a bit cowardly and rather lead-footed. Havleless and touchingly sad, like the shore of an uninhabited island.
 “Awesome,” said Nanny Goat.
 “The end of the earth,” Tanya confirmed.
 “There’s nothointment.
 “What’s not here? ” Nanny Goat sarise.
 “Where they sell ointment.
 The sea was shallow, warm, and gray. . . It pretended to be calm, tame, as if it never battered the local shore with its autumnal storms that eroded many miles of barren, but hard earth. . .
 They went  only toward evening when the sun had relented and a breeze blew from the sea. . .
 Thely a treasure. In the evenyramids of stewed meat—Soviet man’s daily bread.
 “Take what you need and then we will figure it out. You have a chosed generously.
 Thetuously. Never ork and butter as they did in those two weeks vacationing in the South. As for tomatoes, there was nothlaces had no relation whatsoever to the real thing.
 But theal discovery was made three days later, when having had their fill of looking at the sad, barely live sea, they made their way finally to the estuary.
 The sandbar—overgrown art of the year was entirely cut off. In a surprresent. Thled by Scythians, Gets, Sarmatians, and various nameless tribes. Once the outlands of the Roman Empire. Unfortunate, forsaken by all the gods, the motherland of white feather grass and fine suffocating dust. . .
 Already sunburned, lace where they could take cover from the direct rays of the sun. The round sand dunes, whed growing short of full size, offered no shade. At noon, no one went outst vacationers: the locals lived by the laws of the South, burrowing off for siestas at this time of day, regardless of their work schedules. . .
 They found a small hill with three bushes with a trembling hint of shade underneath. They lay down on the hot sand. At thed themselves in its fresh water. You couldn’t say the water was warm; it was hot. They found a half-submerged dt Misha busy for quite a while. Ducks with their adolescent ducklings scurried along the shore, accustomed to the heat, the warm water, and the abundance of food. The shallows, like a can of sardines,teemed with minnows. Only without tomato sauce. The thickets of reeds were filled with a live rustling: something there scurried by, started a ruckus, and emitted various sounds. Unt.
 Tanya folded her arms across her stomach and tapped with her finger.
 “You good in there? Satisfied? ” She understood that yes, he was good. . .
 The ever-prepared Nanny Goat, who ened her book. She started to read aloud.
 “He thought that the mountaear. But the next day, early in the morning, he was wakened by the fresh air in his cart and looked casually to the right. The mornerfectly clear. Suddenly he saw—about twenty steps away, as ure white colossi with their gentle outlines and the whimsical, distinct aerial line of their summits against the distant sky. When he comprehended the true darition, a dream. He shook h. . .”
 Tanya glanced over her shoulder.“You rereading Tolstoy? What for? ”
 “Honestly, I don’t know. I feel like it. Almost every year, and certainly in the summer. Like this, on the beach. On a train. . . In the yard, in the kitchen garden. . . Like visiting a relative. Out of a sense of duty. But love too. It’s a bit boring. But necessary.”
 “Yes, yes. I know. My mother has read Tolstoy that way all her life. Her father, my grandfather, was a Tolstoyan or something like that. He was shot.”
 “Are you kidding? They arrested Tolstoyans too? ” Nanny Goat was surprised.
 “How else? Absolutely. . .” She closed her eyes. She saw an unexpectedly lustrous pure white colossi with their gentle outlines and the whimsical, distinct aerial line of their summits against the distant sky. “I don’t care for him. No, that’s not so. He wrared to agree with him. Then he ups and suddenly writes three sentences about the beauty of the mountains that hit you right between the eyes. . . And side down.”
 She rolled off her back onto her stomach and leaned on her elbow in the sand.
 “Thank you for hauling me out to this hole. Thlace, of course, is awesome. . . Nobody around. . .”
 In fact, there were lots of vacatorizhia, Donetsk, and Kishinev. Many vacatarticularly toward the weekend. But they all gathered amublic beach. . . The Moldovans wlashed about in the shallows, then left, leaving behind stinking mountains of trash to be washed away by the cleansing storms of autumn. No matter what they called themselves, they were the true descendants of the extinct barbarous world.
 Neither the sandbar nor the wild seashore down the staircase interested anyone. Walkeared. If they followed the turn of the sandbar and walked another two to two and a half mossible to imagine. . .
 On the second Saturday of thereserved. L stones. . . They walked over toward the ruins and caught sight of a tent made out of a white sheet strung in seclusion among the rocks: there were several young men inside the tent.
 “It’s the musicians from the club.” Tossing a quick glance in their direction, Tanya recognized them immediately.
 “What club? ” Nanny Goat wondered.
 “The sailors’ club, where our Mama Zina. . .”
 “I hadn’t paid any attention to them. Tanya, you have an incredible visual memory. How did you remember them? ” Nanny Goat continued to be amazed.
 The pianist, the eldest of them, thick-nosed and hairy-legged, waved cordially.
 “Welcome, ladies, welcome! ” he shouted in English.
 Everyone called harticular context of jazz—exclusively by way of musical terminology and classical blues lyrics. Jazz musicians at the time were totally insane, but until today there had been none in Tanya’s circle of friends. The saxophonist sat almost with his back to them, but Tanya recognized him by his light straight hair of a length considered in those days a challenge to the social order. He looked around, looked at Tanya, and she immediately seized her stomach: the child kicked about with unusual force.
 “What’s with you? ” Tanya asked him. He kicked about another time, and then fell quiet. Everything’s all right.
 Tanya and Nanny Goat were stot. We always sit. . .”
 So they ded. . . The forty feet between Tanya and the saxophonrotracted agonizing movement. He touched hy’s. It all happened. He smiled at Tanya, and he looked at her with the same slow gaze, and Tanya already then, it seems, had guessed that at that moment her fate was being decided.
 The musicians were drunk, but within reason. In the evenlay at the local resort hotel and were observing their work regimen. They had been playrove the music, and when it became destructive. The drummer started making moves on Tanya. Tanya couldn’t take her eyes off the saxophonist. At six o’clock, when the sun’s heat had abated, they set off together in the direction of the resort hotel. The guys had left their car at the entrance. Nanny Goat and Mer. Tanya squeezed into the back seat and went off with the musicians. She liked Sergei something awful. Like no one and never before.
 The concert went off with great success. After the concert people danced for a long whe-recorded music. All the musicians got very drunk. Sergei did not dance. They sat behefaction, until he said that there was a room reserved for him but he didn’t remember the number. The key, though, just happened to have attached to enned on it.
 14
 TANYA DID NOT WAKE UP, SHE CAME TO. THE ROOM—A shoddy double wair of wooden beds and a bedside table between them—was filled with hot dense light, like an aquarium filled with water. There was not the slightest movement, not the least flutter, and none of the bustle that often occurs in the early morning. It was as queak. An instant of life in freeze-frame was what it was.
 “And I’m at my peak.” Tanya smalms on her convex belly and stroking it from the sides. “We’re at our peak! ”
 The h of the mountain, and the mountain of her belly—all these things were related.
 “Do you feel it? ” she asked her belly.
 “Do you feel it: you and I have fallen in love. . .”
 Her belly for some reason was her accomplice. She looked at Sergeing alongside her. She had been studyared for him by destiny. . . She squward, lay on her shoulder. In the m scar. There was another one on his forearm. There were many more details of this boyish body that she had not managed to note the night before, but already loved. The big toe on his foot stuck out forward, the foot itself was narrow and not large, like a woman’s. There was the plush of thick white hair on his shin. . . He lay on hisside, one leg bent at the knee. In the shadow of hing tool, and it was not at all without its own character. Prevects were absolutely identical. Thacity for self-oblivion. . . W not covered with a suntan. His skin was as soft as a woman’s. His chest was covered with soft growth, light-colored, like sun-bleached moss. She touched the scar on halm. “Thlace.”
 He rummaged hressed her to his body.
 “Where are you going? Don’t leave. . .”
 “Never,” Tanya laughed. “But can I go to the bathroom? ”
 “No way.”
 He pressed her to himself: everything fit wonderfully. Never before had he experienced such a coincidence. Wening his eyes, he asked her:“Where did you come from? ”
 “Nowhere. I always was.” Tanya laughed.
 “Apparently,” he agreed, running his hands over her neck, breasts, and stomach.
 “Open your eyes,” Tanya said.
 “I am afraened them.
 “And? ” Tanya got up and edged away slightly.
 “Terrs, himself. “Everything was terrific, only I just couldn’t remember your face. You know, once at just thoint I had a terrible trauma. I woke up, and alongside me. . .”
 Tanya clamped her hand over his mouth.
 “Forget it. Immediately forget everything that ever was before. You are Sergei, I’m Tanya, and nothing else matters.”
 Sergei chuckled.“Good. But I just happen to have a wife.”
 “And I have a husband. Two, even. And I’m going to have a baby soon. . .”
 “In what sense? ”
 Serge and leaned on his elbow. Tanya took hlaced it on her belly.
 “In three, three and a half months.”
 Her belly was taut, full. Sergeot.
 “For real? Nothened to me before. . .”
 “Or to me either.” Tanya laughed. “There’s always a first time. . . This is the first time I’ve ever been with you.”
 He got up and went to the shower. He stood under the thin warm stream for several minutes. Then he drank some of the nasty water from halms.
 “The girl’s nuts. I’m goed out of the shower. She was already standed inside. She had a wonderful figure, and breasts, and waist. Her belly was not large, but entirely noticeable.
 He went back to bed and lit a cigarette.
 “Get dressed and leave,” he requested when she sat down next to him on the bed.
 She shook her head.
 “What, are you scared? Everything is all right. I’m not going anywhere.”
 “You’ve got a child inside you, and I could break something in there. Are you supposed to be screwing in your condition? ”
 “Did it seem to you that I shouldn’t be? ”
 “No, I just didn’t notice.”
 “Well, I thosed to. After all, I came to the South ed her belly with her arms.
 “In what sense? ”
 Tanya laughed.
 “Go swimming, roll around in the sun.”
 She dove into bed under the sheet and hugged him around the neck.
 “Everything I like, he likes. Word of honor.”
 She was a wonderful gassed, while his desire remained. And regnant. They spent the whole day in the hotel room, leaving only once to get mineral water. . .
 In the evening the musicians gave another concert, and Tanya could not take her mind off Seryozha’s music for a minute—it was the continuation of their new love. Then they spent the nerformances in the morning, and left. Tanya ran over to Nanny Goat’s place for a meared from Nanny Goat’s sight forever.
 15
 THE JAZZ TRIO’S TOUR RAN FROM THE MIDDLE OF SUMmer until late autumn. They called themselves GAZ—Gabrielian, Aleksandrov, Zvorykin. It was the, they were still just learning to function as a single organism, and things were just beginning to come together. Every day they made a new discovery. Although they d their usual drinking habits, they essentially got drunk not on wine, but on the high that came from the music they made. The eldest and drrovisation. The drummer, Aleksandrov—a former engers. He assured all that wle, swimming. He had never, by the way, learned how to swim. Seven years later he chanced upon the golden veital on the outskirts of Leningrad. . .
 Saxophonist Sergei Zvorykin also belonged to the breed of musical maniacs. By thutation as a sane human being. That was Tanya’s chosen man and his friends. It turned out that the people Tanya had taken so close to heart, the people for whom she had so longed, were not doctors, lolitical. They deak for them, taking joy in that fact that it, their music, turned out to be so good at doing that. . .
 Tanya listened closely, not only at rehearsals and concerts, but all the time, from morning until night, from night until morning. It turned out that the musounded or horns blown.
 She told Sergei about her discovery. He just nodded his head.
 “Why, of course. And in dreams too. Especially in dreams. . .”
 Tanya straossible to remember it. . . From that day on a musarable from the movement of the train itself. . .
 The jazzmen’s musatterns. . . The sounds of machart. . . Thoints and taking off once again from almost any chance note. . .
 Once, when lyress this sensation verbally. Sergei nodded matter-of-factly.
 “Aleatoric. It is called aleatoric music. Chance contaossibilities.”
 “Le? ” Tanya brightened.
 “You could put it that way. Talk to Gar what I need along the way.”
 “Man, everything’s been figured out already,” Tanya said in dismay. “No matter what you discover, it’s been studied and described. . .”
 “You’re silly,” laughed Sergei. He stroked the rolling hill of her firm belly.
 “You’re not going to overheat, are you? Let’s go sit in the shade, huh? ”
 In the space of two weeks he had grown as accustomed to Tanya and her belly as ent the last six years with her and not with the retired ballerina Elvira Poluektova, who was totally devoid of female bulges or softness, which, it bears mentioning, he liked a lot.
 Following two more weeks of gigs in Odessa, the trio headed for the Caucasus mountain region.
 “Fut you on a train, and then we’ll head out,” Garik announced to Tanya.
 Tanya asked them not to send her off and to let her stay until the end of their tour. Sergei added:“At least for one week, Garik. We’ll do Sochi and send Tatiana from there. Besides, it’ll be easier to get tickets by then.”
 This was absolutely true: train or air tickets were hugely difficult to obtain at the end of August.
 “What about her belly? ” Garik frowned. He had two chregnancies inevitably ended with birth.
 Tanya folded her thin arms over her belly.
 “Garik, honey, I still have two more months ahead. . . Don’t banish me now. I’ll be good for something.”
 Garik raised his hands in defeat.
 “You’re just like the Frog Princess. . . Ultimately, it’s Seryoga’s decision. Not mine.”
 Garik was a classic Caucasian womanizer, who considered it his sacred duty to bang any and every big-busted blond at the same time he idolized his bright and scholarly wife, a Georgian woman grown old before her age, with a Ph.D. and a letterless bra size. He was prepared to approve of any of Seryoga’s affaregnancy was a dilemma for him.
 “Are you sick, Seryoga? Tanka’s a nice little girl, but how you can fuck her with another man’s goods inside, I’ll never know.”
 Tanya’s belly in fact excited Sergei terribly. His marriage to Poluektova, who was abstractly sexual and barren as a rock, had been concluded coldly and straightforwardly. At the outset he had rented a room from her, then he started to brendence from everyone. At one trotest against any kind of falsehood, be it official or everyday.
 “We have total synergy at the molecular level.” Tanya stated thrising fact, and Sergei agreed.
 The tiny thing in the middle of Tanya’s belly got in absolutely no one’s way. Tanya saer father. Sergei did not object to this either.
 There was also one other, profoundly intimate circumstance. For all her owerful release of the central nervous system.
 “It’s the most fundamental dhized drowsily.
 “You’re mistaken, I know a lot of women who can achieve it with anyone,” Sergei objected.
 “But for some reason I don’t want to contloring how many men in the world I can achieve it with. I th with you.”
 “Just keep ed with me.” Sergei laughed.
 From time to time Tanya called Vitalka and her father in Moscow. It was hone in the evening. It was preclanning to return to Moscow. She didn’t have the resolve to tell either her father or Vitalka that: Vitalka was too vain, and her father too logical and serious. As utting the child at risk.
 “He’s doing well, Daddy! And I’m doing well! We’re so well! We’re going to stay here just a little bit longer! ” She held the phone with one hand and Seryozha’s hand with the other.
 “Should I send money? ” Pavel Alekseevich asked.
 “No money. Don’t send any money. Day after tomorrow I’m going to Sukhumi! ” she shouted joyfully, whhone call was over, went to his study to down a glass of tranquilizer. He arate. She should be confined to bed rest.
 It could never have entered Pavel Alekseevich’s head that she would not return to Moscow to give birth, but would remain to deliver her child in some other city, into a stranger’s hands.
 But that was precened. The tour, havinnacle of success in Sochi. In Sukhumi they were received considerably less enthusiastically, and in Batumi they gave only two of the four scheduled concerts. Scorchartly because it was the beginning of the tangerine harvest season, and so they left, breaking their semilegal contract. Gar.
 Over the past month Tanya had notack of children in there. At nut his hand on her stomach and feel a heel or a fist thrashing and with entirely distinct outlines.
 “I could give birth to twins,” Tanya threatened Sergei, but he was lighthearted and without a care.
 “What difference does it make? If it’s twins, it’s twins. One gray, one whs to her thin skin stretched to its maximum from within, and his attraction to the future child’s domicile not only did not wane, but, on the contrary, increased.
 “I like it so much, I love it so awfully much. You wregnant and having babies with me. . . Like Natalia Nikolaevna. . .” Like all Petersburgers, he did not invoke Goncharova’s surname—there was no need. “Abortions are abominations. When she was young, Poluektova got herself scraped every three months. Ballet dancers don’t have babies. But you and I will never do that. . . Never. . . It’s so beautiful. Carefully. . . very carefully. . . I won’t hurt you. . .”
 Up untart from each other.
 Tanya did not return to Moscow. She flew to Leningrad at the end of October. They had no place to live. Initially they crashed with Tolya Aleksandrov, the drummer. Long ago hencil cases with three-fourths of a window in each. True, following the deaths of his mother and grandmother Tolya came into two whole rooms, and now he let one of them to his friends. The money earned on the tour quickly ran out, and so they lived together with Tolya as one needy family. Tanya frotatoes, did the laundry, cleaned the neglected rooms, and listened to the music, that same unceasing sound track that she had learned to hear during their travels. . .
 In the mital. They dt her without documentation from a women’s clinic. All she had wains. Whlace the woman in labor on a cart and take her to the delivery room. The baby was deler, the midwife asked Tanya if she was related to Doctor Kukotsky. Once she learned that she was his daughter, the midwife never left her side and at the end of the tenth hour of labor—which was good, even quick, for a first delivery—received her little girl with rather long black hair.
 When she heard that she had a daughter, Tanya cried bitterly. Never had she been so profoundly dointed. . .
 The mhone number, and congratulated him on the birth of a granddaughter.
 16
 PAVEL ALEKSEEVICH PUT DOWN THE RECEIVER. HIS HEART suddenly draed a beat, then burst into a drumroll.
 “Oh-ho, one hundred eighty beats a minute,” he estimated. “Paroxysmal tachycardia. . .” He reached for hast four. A night girl. Born between midnight and late sunrise. December 16. The darkest days of the year. Close to the solstice.
 The second hand of hulse. One hundred ninety beats a minute.
 He lowered his legs from the bed. Dry sinewy sticks. He pressed his finger against the ball of his foot: not a hint of edema.
 “All right, thank God, I have a granddaughter. No more feeling offended. My dointment is of no significance.”
 He sat for a rather long time, waiting for the rhythm of his heart to settle down.“Most likely it’s sinus arrhythmia.” Pavel Alekseevich quickly arrived at a diagnosis.
 He stood up and dartment in which he had lived almost twenty years. A masslace couldn’t have been more run-down. At first he looked into the girls’ room: there were two beds there. Toma was sleepiled with a mountain of unironed laundry. Dark masses of leaves b earth. ..
 He turned down the corridor to the left and looked into their former bedroom, Elena’s room. There was a complex smell of hospital, dust, and some sort of bitter herb.
 It was filthy. Thelace had become very filthy. Vasoor, and she never really had known how to clean right. Toma worked and went to school: the girl had a heavy load. He should ask Praskovia, the cleaning woman in their section, to come by. No, that was ossible: Vasilisa would take offense. . . But you couldn’t put a child in this room. In my study. That’s the optimum choice. And I can clean my place up myself. A crace. I’ll bring a changing table from the section. And ly for retirement. How fortunate, I’ve already turned sixty-five. . .
 Elena was not sleeping. She looked at the dark silhouette in the doorway. The light burst from behind his back, and the semblance of a halo had formed around his head and shoulders.
 “Is that you? ” Elena asked.
 Pavel Alekseevich sat down at her feet. Elena had always loved to sleep on hillows. Earlart of the bed, while his little flat one lay on the right. . . He stuck his hand under the blanket and stroked her feet in their silky socks.
 “I just got a call from Leningrad: Tanya’s given birth to a little girl.”
 “No, no,” Elena ted him softly. “I’m the one who’s had the little girl.”
 “Tanya has grown up, gotten married, and given birth to a little girl,” Pavel Alekseevich reiterated.
 Elena’s eyes flashed brightly in the semidarkness.
 “It’s too early. It’s too dark. Where is Tanechka? ”
 “In Leningrad.”
 “Tell her to come in here. I haven’t seen her in a long time. . . Is she at school? ”
 “Tanechka finished school a long, long time ago. She’s in Leningrad. She’s gatiently.
 “Say sometha,” Elena requested. “I don’t understand that.”
 Pavel Alekseevich moved his round stool to the head of the bed. The young Murka, who had arranged herself under Elena’s hand, started and opened one eye. Pavel Alekseevich sat down next to his wife and took her by the hand. Her hand was dry, cool, and almost weightless.
 For many years they had called him PA. At work they had pronounced eriors by their initials. At home in the better years of their family life he had been called Pah. But now Pavel Alekseevich wondered whether Elena had taken him for her own father. He held her hand, stroked her fluffy uncombed hair, and decided not to find out who she took him for. It wasn’t all that ortant. . .
 “I’m leaving for Leningrad right now, to see how things are there, and I’ll try to bring them back,” he informed Elena.
 “That’s nice,” she sighed. “Tell Tanya to come in.”
 Pavel Alekseev a coherent dialogue.
 “It seems to me she’s having some trouble with her husband. Perhaps he offended her somehow. I don’t know. And I don’t intend to ask. Last time Vitaly called was last week. He asked about Tanya, and I told hlanning to return soon, but that she hadn’t given me her address. What do you think about that? ”
 Elena was perplexed and began to fret.
 “I don’t know, what do you think. . . You yourself. . . I don’t. . .”
 “In any case it’s better for her and the child to be at home than just anywhere, don’t you think? ” He asked a question that required no more than a nod of the head.
 But Elena no longer heard him. She swept her hands anxed a need for whenever she found herself in a difficult situation. The cat sat in a chair, at some distance. He put it on the bed near Elena. Elena squeezed it with both hands and smiled. As soon as she touched the anace of the bedroom: her gaze became not quite vacuous, but focused somewhere without, beyond the bounds of the here and now. . .
 Pavel Alekseevich sat a bit longer, then went to his study and called the information line. It turned out he had plenty of time to make the day train to Leningrad. He took ht in stock at home. He decided not to tell anyone he was leaving, and to call in the evening from Leningrad. He was not worrlace he could always stay, and there was the Academy’s hotel on Khalturin Street, where they would always find a room for him. . . He set out for the trahysician instructions for. . .
 The Leningrad day train traveled an absurdly long time, and Pavel Alekseevich turned out not to have a single book with him. He cast a curtitiously—and tried to figure out whether they were older than Tanya. . . Probably they were even younger. Untressive thoughts. When he was young, hrecisely by that inner sense. Now he was at a loss: Tanya had acted completely onsibly. You have to admlanation whatsoever. Now, with a kind of maniacal consistency she was making everyone sick with worry—her husband, her father, even Vasilisa. . . She had gort it. . . The girl was wrong on all counts.
 He, Pavel Alekseevich, could not seem to find himself guilty of anything, but that was irrelevant. He took her wrongfulness on honderable fault. He reproached hut their lives in order: his wife was ill, his daughter had left home. . . Every t from the canvas-covered flask. Itwas an automatromised trouble. . . The hydroxyl group (–OH) near the saturated carbon atom, bless rotected him in its usual way from troubles both external and internal. . .
 In the event trying to touch each other with a shoulder, an elbow, or a knee—everything had come together of its own in his head. The sole plauslanation for Tanya’s unreasonable—no matter how you looked at it—behavior wasa new romance. He recalled a sozhnikov, within a few days of when she was to give birth. Theital she refused to return to her husband and moved in with Volodya. Her husband tracked down the home wrecker and filled him with lead. The poor woman was left wrison. . . About five years later she came back to see him. After the infertility center had already been founded. . . Galent three years in treatment before she could conceive again. She came to Pavel Alekseevich to give birth to the baby. Her second labor was complresentation. . . For some reason his memory held hundreds and hundreds of cases. . . Thus Pavel Alekseevared himself for a meeting with his daughter and consoled himself with the fact that Vitalik wouldhardly track anyone down. . .
 From the traital. The chital. He washed hut on his white coat. They took hs. . . He did not recognize her immediately, but she, seeing her father, quietly “oh-ed” and flew straight out of bed onto his neck.
 They held each other tight: there was no question of either being offended.
 “Dad, it’s great that you’ve come. . . You’re a real. . . Tell them to show you our little girl. How’s Mama? What’s Tomka up to? ”
 He stroked her short-shorn l shoulder blades. . .
 “My sered. The other women in the ward were all eyes. Tanya was a specicion—had formed that the girl was unmarried, a drifter, and something about her was not right. . . Now ecial in addition because her father was someone famous. . .
 THEY GAVE TANYA A DRESSING GOWN, AND THE TWO OF them set out for the nursery ward. White swaddled bundles just slightly larger than loaves of bread lay in miniature beds that resembled a doll’s.
 “Go fered.
 The local doctor was about to extract herself from the hastrocession around him, but he signaled to her: don’t.
 It was not much of a ring to recognize his own among them.
 “Here,” Tanya pointed to a baby. Their name was written in violet letters at the foot of the crib. . . The lt. Dark bangs fell on her high forehead, her face was a bit yellow, her nose big, her mouth small and tightly shut. “Beautiful, isn’t she? ” Tanya asked possessively.
 Pavel Alekseevich lifted the swaddled bundle out of the crib, and his heart ached: our baby. . . Then he stuck hlaced the bundle on the changing table. The lened her mouth with a little smack and squeaked. Pavel Alekseevulled aside her undershirt. . . stra by her legs. . . He ran h of her head, then once again turned her on her back. Then he felt her protuberant stomach and pressed his finger alongside the bandaged stalk of her umbilical cord.
 “Fresh as they come,” he murmured. “Her liver is slightly enlarged—infantile jaundice, nothing terrible. You haven’t forgotten everything yet? Do you understand what’s happening there? The fetal hemoglobin is breaking down. . .” He placed three fat fingers on the left side of her chest. Then he took the tiny hand, straightened the fist, and touched the soft nails, which were bent at the edges.
 “Stethoscope,” he tossed out eared.
 He listened for a minute.
 “Normal. It seemed to me at first that her little nails were a bit blue. But her heart is just fine. At least there’s no defect.”
 The l. Tanya watched all these manhone—the same tenderness and assurance in the way they held them, the same freedom of movement and ease of touch. . .
 “A marvelous little baby. I like this kind the best: tiny, firm, and with good musculature. . . You know, she’s not of your breed. She’s a Goldberg. I’m goered quietly in Tanya’s ear. “Congratulations, my littlegirl. . . In a day or two we’ll gather your stuff and take you home.”
 Tanya had not thought of golace alongside the newborn little girl—she agreed readily.
 “We’ll go, but not for long. I’m moving to Piter. I have a. . .” she pondered for a mrecisely she had here. “Everything I need is here.”
 Pavel Alekseevich nodded understandingly.“That’s what I thought.”
 17
 Dear Sergei!
 How my hand enjoys writing your name! How your name suits you; it’s the only one for you. But it could have been Vitalik or Gena. . .
 Greetings, Sergei!
 Congratulations to you on having me and to me on having you. Everything about my existence today is different from yesterday. I had a little girl. It looks like we were terribly deceived, and she got substituted for a little boy. But she is very beautiful, everyone says, she looks like me. Keep in mind, I’m going to need a little boy soon. A little boy who looks like you. The fact that the little girl doesn’t resemble you and could not resemble you makes her a not very interesting creature for me. That is, I like her. They brought her to me today. She articularly dear to me as a witness to our love, as a witness to your caresses. As a secret partant even. I think that she will love you terribly, in a way that will be torturous for me.
 I am jealous of you. Jealous of your former l you touch with your fingers. Of all the women you caressed before.
 Seared, the world has changed so awfully much. Because I used to look at everythoint of view, but now I look at things from two: I ask myself what would you think? I kiss you wherever I want. This time in the little indentation under your neck and on the scar on the left. Our little girl says hello. I don’t have any milk, but they say it might still come. Bring kefir and a big towel. It hurt, but went quickly.
 Tanya
 SERGEI READ THE LETTER, NEATLY REFOLDED THE SHEET of paper along the crease, and placed ocket of his jacket. He had just deltionist behind the little window a bouquet of tea roses, some food, and a note. He had asked where the windows in Tanya’s ward looked out, and it took him a long time to figure out how to find them. He had known serson. He walked away from the information desk and headed for the staff entrance. A door guard was sitting there.
 “Where do you think you’re going? ”
 “I’m here to frovised. “Someone roton synchrotron. Where can I leave my coat? ”
 The proton synchrotron that had for some reason rolled off Sergei’s tongue thoroughly satisfied the door guard.
 “The coatroom attendant’s out s yourself. No one will steal it. We all know each other here.” The door guard let hass. Remov the stairs. The door to the section was closed, so he rang the bell. A whened the door.
 “What do you want? ”
 “They called me about fment,” Sergei answered, trying not to breathe wine fumes at the nurse.
 “You have to talk to the head nurse, eared.
 Sergeotted the door he needed, ward four. Tanya was standital gown—very tall and very thin.
 “Tanya,” he called to her. She turned around. He had never seen her not pregnant, and she seemed like a stranger and terribly young.
 The bouquet lay on her bed stand, not yet put in water. It was obvarcel she had immediately run to the window to look for him.
 “How did you get in here? ” Tanya asked, somewhat embarrassed and freeing herself from his embrace. The women ing out of their heads.
 “I got called in. To flain, because visitations were not allowed. . .
 “They just took the children away. Too bad. If you had shown up about twenty minutes earlier, you could have taken a look at her.” Tanya smiled the silliest of smiles.
 At that moment Sergei seemed to her to be dazzlingly handsome and unbearably her own. She had long ago and permanently forgotten that the chassionately wanted to brag. After Pavel Alekseevraised her daughter yesterday evening, she had started to like her a lot more.
 “Let’s go out somewhere before they throw me out. . .”
 The section at that hour was quiet. They pulled at one door, then a second, and found an empty lushed him inside. Here they burortant things. Tanya told him that after they let her out she was taking the child to Moscow for a bit. He told her that he had been to see Poluektova and told her that he had a daughter, and that Poluektova had been artment to live in. . .
 “In your wartment? ” Tanya was taken aback.
 “What’s the big deal? It’s normal. We’ll keep an eye on her place, walk her dogs, and feed her old cats. . .”
 Tanya pressed his wrists.
 “All right. We’ll decide that later. But on the whole retty cool that she’s so. . . magnanimous, is it? ”
 “No, you don’t understand. It’s just easier for her that way. She has two borzois, and they’re not easy to deal with. . . But they listen to me. . .”
 They buriece. . . For a whole hour no one bothered them in the linen room as they checked to make sure that nothing had changed now that Tanya did not have a belly anymore. . . But everyth; and the dry—dry. . . And their love, as it turned out, had not diminished one single bit. . .
 18
 THREE DAYS AFTER GIVING BIRTH TANYA FELT AS IF SHE had been born again, as if the birth of her daughter had infused her with a certain quality of newness as well. Essentainful degree—a thought had already awakened inside her that she wanted to share with her daughter before anyone else. She lowered her brown beanlened mouth and tried to imbue the tightly swaddled bundle with the idea that they loved each other, mother and daughter, and would take joy in each other, and belong to each other, but not solely. . . that she, Tanya, would have her own separate l, Tanya would give her freedom and the right to live the way she wanted, and that she would be the older daughter, and then there would be a little boy, and another little boy, and a little girl. . . And our family will not be like those others where the daddies yell at the mommies and fight over money and the children scream and take each other’s toys. . . And we will have a house in Crimea, and a garden, and music. . . Tanya fell asleep wy future, while the little girl continued to suck. She had an amazfire emanates warmth. . . Tanya had never known such strong and powerful sleep. . . The pract. . .
 A week later Tanya was released, and Pavel Alekseevensive hotel. The lendicularly on the immensely wide bed made of Karelian birch and covered with a woolen blanket and then a cotton-stuffed one. Soon after, Sergehone. He pulled off h cold and rushed to the child. He sat down on the bed to look at the new face ackaging.
 “Oh my gosh, she’s so small. And how she makes you want to sleep! ”
 “She’s a terrorific girl, that’s for certain,” Tanya agreed. “As soon as they brought her into the ward, I would conk out.”
 Essentlanning to go to Moscow, but things turned out not quite as she had wanted. Poluektova was scheduled to leave for Perm only at the end of January, whlywood wall. . . Sergearents. Tanya’s departure upset hroof.
 Tanya hastily introduced her father to Sergei and asked if he would let her and Sergei go for a walk. Pavel Alekseevich let his daughter go for three hours, until the next feeding, and stayed with his little granddaughter. F until his daughter returned. He dreamed that he was asleep, but ond. He was the eldest of the chlayed by Lenochka in the role of an eight-year-old and Toma as a two-year-old. The other children were familiar, but also refashioned from adults he had come to know in the later years of his life. The dualrise Pavel Alekseevich. What troubled him, rather, was that one of the boys was someone he did not know at all. Only at the very end of the dream, when the crowd of them poured out of thelace. . .
 The next day at eight fifteen in the morning, Pavel Alekseevich, his daughter, and granddaughter were home on Novoslobodskaya Street. Toma had not yet set off for work, Vasing herself with one hand against the wall. Out of the half-opened door into Elena’s room, Murka Jr. poked out first, followed by Elena in a robe thrown over her shoulders.
 “Tanechka, I’ve been waushed her away and reached for the bundle:
 “Tanechka. . .”
 “Momma, that’s my daughter.”
 “That’s my daughter,” echoed Elena, anxious consternation forming on her face.
 “Come with me, Momma, and I’ll show her to you. . .”
 Tanya spread the choor Elena, but drawing her into the new event.
 Tanya undid the layers of clothes and extricated the tiny body. The lened her eyes and yawned.
 Elena looked on tensely and as ointment.
 “Well, do you like her? ”
 Elena lowered her head in embarrassment and looked the other way.
 “That’s not Tanechka. That’s another little girl.”
 “Mom, of course it’s not Tanechka. We still haven’t decided on a name for her. Maria, maybe? Masha, huh? ”
 “Evgenered barely audibly. Tanya did not hear what she said.
 Vaseated:“How else? Evgenia. After your grandmother. . .”
 Tanya bent over the lushing her little fist into her mouth.
 “I don’t know. . . I have to think about it. Evgenia? ”
 Whward, as if by a tidal wave, held there for a minute, then lowered down. . . She rushed about the apartment, looking into every cluttered corner. . .
 “Dad, we’re remodeling,” she said to her father fifteen minutes later.
 “Yes, actually, we’re long overdue,” Pavel Alekseevich agreed, “only now, I think, is not the time. There’s a baby artment. Maybe in the summer, when you all go to the dacha. . .”
 “No, no, I’ll leave for Piter later, we need to do it right now. We can start with the nursery. . . Then the common spaces, your study, the bedroom. . .”
 In the evenainters. . . Pavel Alekseev in formation and standing at attention. . . Vasresent by Evgenia Fedorovna in 1911, when it had already been not very new. But even that seemed not enough for Tanya, and w.
 The nameless lractically no attention. Tanya settled her rint fabric, and for a while hauled the basket from room to room. Then Elena asked that the little girl be left near her bed, which formed a quiet corner that Tanya did not touch for the time being. The speed wer that recalled the heat of African deserts.
 The next week was devoted to the kitchen and the bathroom. Cooking at home was cancelled. Tanya bought ed in from time to time. Vhoned on the third day, and Tanya greeted him with indifferent gladness. He came over immediately, frowning, with an insulted look on his face, but she did not trouble herself to notice. She showed hrivate trinket. To hromised to visit him as soon as she finished her household affairs here.
 “Valental news.
 “Why didn’t you bring her along? ” Tanya asked wrise.
 “She’ll come. She frequently comes to visit Pavel Alekseevich. You know, all the legal hassles. . . Perhaps they’ll parole him early. The crime is the variety they usually serve only two-thirds of their terms for. . .”
 “I should have done something about Ilya Iosifovich’s affairs. . . The whole lot of them, after all, are so amazt,” thought Tanya. But that was unjustetent, and whatever she did she thought through carefully and carried out to the letter. . .
 Tanya slept layed that day. . . That week he played a lot, almost every even—at institutes, clubs, and cafés. . . On the mornlaying and even bought a ticket for the day train. But such a f. She remembered how cold it had been in the train when she returned to Moscow with her newborn daughter. She was frightened that the little girl might catch cold. . . The decend New Year’s Eve in Moscow and killed the few hours in between at a restaurant at the Leningrad train station. . .
 By thartment like fire. The place smelled of paint, glue, and roast goose. The table was set up in the former nursery. Toma, on Tanya’s orders, decorated the seven-foot fatsle as fig tree). At the head of the table sat Pavel Alekseevy face. Vasetlike yellow and crimson headscarf, which made her as self-conscious as if she had come out with bare shoulders. Toma, on the other hand, had put on a dress w. The guests mother of Tanya’s retired husbands. The basket werturbation.
 At a quarter to twelve the doorbell rang, and Tanya ran to open the door, havkins. . . In the doorway, wearorts bag in hand, stood Sergei.
 This was the most bizarre family holiday one could imagine. Except for Tanya and Sergeiercing sense of alienation from the others. As letely lost their names. Even her daughter Tanya, who more or less resembled her old self, was slart, as in a cutaway or cross-section, where the invisible, internal contours of the object usually indicated by lines of dashes were those of the little girl revealed by the cutaway. . . Vasot was the only one that was reassuring. Flutterorting herself and touching the young long-haired fellow in black (a member of the clergy? ) as she went, all resence of her husband and just as Elena had done during the war, while her husband sat and watched, as if he didn’t care, and was this good. . . Ficture before her, Vasilisa entreated: Lord, have mercy, Lord. . . Establish, O Lord, my unstable heart on the rock of Thy commandments, for Thou only art Holy and Lord. . . The words flew off and fell downward, the piritual, no matter where you looked. . . Sins, all our mortal sins. . .
 Valentite her total and final estrangement from their unintelligent and outdated religion—observed Tanya mournfully. She had become acquaosed toward her. . . although what else should th between the two brothers. . . She was promromiscuous. . .
 The Goldberg brothers—or husbands—conducted themselves appropriately, but they hardly “didn’t care,” as Vasilisa had surmised. Both of them were paretender. For the fointment and justice of defeat. . . It had already struck twelve, and they were late wagne. Tanya had forgotten the bottle ened it. . . The New Year had already begun, and they drank a toast that all be well, that Ilya Iosecially the brand-new baby girl. . . They all talked nolates, while only Tanya and Sergei sat silently, looking at each other, well, staring at each other like two icons. Everyone saw that thlanet, or whatever. . . What in Tanya was singular and slightly enigmatic waswritten all over him in full color. The Goldberg brothers had absolutely notherfectly. Espec. Pavel Alekseevast months. . . Serges. . . At the fing out the window. . . The sound roduced with obvious effort by the long-haired youth with the familiar face. . .
 Pavel Alekseevanied; she had obviously not forgotten her music lessons—and this gladdened him.
 Sergele, fade, and dissolve. The young man’s face was not just fam hanging slightly over the lower. . . He placed hhone alongside the laundry basket, shook his head, ran his fingers through his hair, then threw it back with a familiar gesture. . . His hair is full of sand, Elena thought.
 Then Tanya carrast the door to the bathroom, could hear them laughing. They chatted and laughed for two hours. In the morn. Pavel Alekseevt until late in the day: the night before he had had a lot to drink. Elena practen as she recollected where she knew that musician from, and seemed to have remembered. . .
 By the end of January the remodeling was finished. The apartment had been renovated, and Vast it in her nightstand. Tanya turned the household over to Toma, stocked up on grains and macaroni, sugar, and flour. She hung new curtains and bought a washing machine. . . Then she announced to Pavel Alekseevich that she was leaving.
 “Mama’s grown accustomed to her, leave her with us. When you get your llored.
 In the space of tatients. No matter what he de belly—he never forgot for a minute the little girl in the wicker basket. He mentally kept track of her newborn, st again. . . His sole and constant desire was to be alongside her basket, alongside the little girl who emitted infantile radiation and sweet slumber. She stlace where the family brush would eventually grow. She sort of remed together in little needles. . . But her forehead was Goldberg’s high forehead. . .
 Tanya had been two years old when she had come ing Tanya bathe her, touching her little red unwalked-on feet. It was a purely natural feel, and an eagle an eaglet. . . At throfound animalistic sense of love for one’s young. . . The lowest of all high emotions. . .
 “I say that absolutely seriously. We’ll match her up with donor breast milk. Tomorrow I’m turning in my resignation. . .”
 “Dad, what are you saying? ” Tanya gazed at her father’s wrression she had never seen in it before—entreaty. It made her feel uneasy, and she became indignant: “What are you talking about? I can’t imagine you retired! You’re goorridge,are you? Take her for walks in her stroller? ”
 He nodded.“Uh-huh. Wleasure. Tanya, I’ve spent too little time on the family. And now’s just the time. Mama and I will take her for strolls.”
 “Mama’s totally out of onded gloomily.
 “I don’t know. I’m not sure. . .”
 Tanya embraced his neck and tickled him behind his ears.
 “Dad, you’re fantastic, really. I’ll bring the baby girl to you, for sure. You know I want to have a lot of children. Girls and boys, five of them.”
 Pavel Alekseevich clenched Tanya’s hands, wasted on laundry and remodeling, kissed them, and went to the kitchen to down an absolutely necessary dose: three-fourths of a medium-size, broad-faceted glassful. The gears were turnlanned to have so dear? I can’t even say that it’sblood. . . There’s no blood, no parentage, nothricious, and good-for-nothing call of the heart. . .
 Tanya was in a hurry. She had a whole lonsible and organized human being. . . The most expenstized. Vasrocedure, with Toma as godmother. For starters, Vasilisa flatly refused to go to the St. Priest served. Tanya dealt w the notion entirely. At that, Vasers, to her street felt boots with the rubber galoshes. . .The sacrament of bapterformed at the Church of St. Pimen. From that day on the little girl was designated Evgenia, and Tanya struck the thin cross from her list. All that was left was to give Elena a bath in the new bathtub. It had been more than a year sossible so as not to flood the neighbors downstairs.
 Tanya filled the tub. Elena pressed her elbows to her side and feebly resisted.
 “You have to get undressed. Look, Mommy, there’s already water in the tub. . .” Tanya coaxed her, and reluctantly she obeyed.
 Her mother’s gauntness was paounds. Empty folds of flesh hung from Elena’s shoulders and arms, and at the sieces of fat-streaked flesh. Of her mother’s former womanhood all that remaubis.
 At long last Tanya sat her mother in the warm water. Elena lay back and stretched out her legs.
 “How good it is. . .”
 “I’m longe. Looking dry was quite all right. . .
 “Wait, Tanechka. I want to lie here for a bit. It’s such bliss. . . Was the bathtub broken before? ” Elena asked in a very hale voice.
 “Yes. Now it’s fixed.”
 Elena closed her eyes. Her haed into the water and got wet. Tanya moved it to the side.
 “Everything changes in water. My head is a lot better in warm water. I don’t want you to live at home. I don’t want you to live with me. I forget everything, and it seems to me that now I’ve forgotten more than I remember. But soon I’ll forget even how much I forgot. Don’t be frly dying in the most usual way, from the middle of my head. Right now I feel very good. I haven’t felt so good in a long time, and I want to say good-bye to you. I’m being consumed by a hole. For some reason what’s happening to me is very shameful. And I don’t know if anything will remain at the very end. Tell me, how old am I? ”
 “Soon you’ll be fifty-two. . .”
 “And you? ”
 “I’m twenty-three.”
 “Good. The water has cooled. Add a little bit more hot. . . I’m not sure of anyone or anything. Sometle I know. . . At times there’s Vasilisa, with someone else inside her. . . I’m not even sure of myself. . . You know about that.”
 “No, Mommy. I don’t know anything about that. . .”
 “Never mind, whatever. I wanted to tell you that at this minute I am I and you are you, and I love you very much. And now I’m going to say good-bye to you. And then you soap me up. . . And then leave. . .”
 Tanya wanted to object, but her tongue refused, because all she could have saathetic, meaningless words. She lathered her mother’s ha, and directed the stream of water from the shower head to rinse off the suds. . . She washed all the sagging folds of Elena’s narrow body, dried her dry, and covered her skin with baby cream. Then she dressed her in a long flannel shirt and took her to her bed. It was nearly nine in the evening. Pavel Alekseevrofessional education. Tanya was all packed. They ate supper together, and he saw the girls off to the station.
 The Moscow period of Tanya’s life was over.
 19
 DURING HIS LAST PRISON TERM LUCKY GOLDBERG SPENT not a s’s sick bay. The head doctor—an elderly, real shed half her work on him. For all of her rottenness—havare him from getting transferred to general labor. . .
 Had there been a male doctor etty underhandedness. What reconcetually grazing at the doctor’s side was her twenty-year-old mentally disableddaughter whom she was afraid to leave at home alone. Thse—tagged behind her. . .
 Perhaps for the fants—held its tongue. Over the past two-plus years he had drudged away as attendant hysician in fact, he never once bothered her with stormy discussions, never called her on anything,never tossed a mug at her, and never yelled. . . When they were saying their good-byes, she uttered to Goldberg words that amazed and even shamed him: she turned out to be smarter and better than he had thought. But perhaps the matter lay prec him. . . After wh by the same system she worked for. . .
 In a word, Ilya Iosse! ) and marched toward the gate. It closed behers with him. . . The local tra steam again. . . An hour before the traarcel of food. A notebook of sheets of paper sewn together lay between a loaf of bread and two cans of stew meat. . .
 “All moral foundations have been undermined, Pasha. The moral foundations of life, the moral foundations of science. . . But the human bearately and bound together only on the eve of his release.
 Once agaaternity. . . The old men drank, fing the motion of their arms for a second. . .
 “Your health. . .”
 “The hole of holes, Pasha, the hole of holes. . . But the head doctor ordered journals for me from Novosibirsk University. American, German, French. . . From the 1930s forward. I thened when the Center for Medical Genetics was shut down. Thecialization. . . A textbook that’s not a textbook. . . An introduction to medical genetics. . .”
 Pavel Alekseevich reached for the bottle, which was already light. . . What a wreck I’ve turned into. . . Ilyusha’s as strong as an ox: thot has wrinkles, and where does he get the strength, the energy. . .
 More than two weeks had passed s in Moscow. In that perublishing it soon. Khrushchev’s fall, whrison, interested him only insofar as it signified the final defeat of Lysenko and his henchmen. The most slace in his absence was the formation of the Institute of Genetics. Naturally, he rushed off farte. . .
 The fearls hardly before swine. . . The beast who sat before h, and a diamond-hard fortress of ambition to match his nickname. . . But the two of them also had a lot -quality brains. . . The director listened with the highest degree of attentiveness, but gave no indication of his thoughts either in word or with movement of his eyebrows.
 Only forty micenter of rejuvenated genetic science. Goldberg fell sresentiment. The director also was silent. He knew how to hold a pause. Goldberg did not.
 Ilya Iosroject for creating a center for genetic consulting to the most abstract of ideas, the realization of which would require about thirty years. . . Interruptoint.
 “Kolya, are you going to give me a laboratory or not? ”
 The doleon’s about it: diminutive facial features, a chubby chin that flowed softly into a massive short neck. The tional significance. . . His brain was hard at work, but the look on his face said nothing. Should he stave off sayingno, and leave it to this cocked fool to figure out for himself with time that in some casesyes signifies nothing more than a variation ofno, or cut him to shreds immediately. . . They were already enemies anyway, and they would become even more bitter enemies, that the director understood for certain. There was nothersonal satisfaction. For that reason he malastic teeth, and answered.
 “No, Ilya. I have absolutely no need for you. . .”
 All of this Ilya Iosifovich related to his friend.
 “It turns out, Pashenka, that he has no need for me, or Sidorov, or Sokolov, or Sakharov. He doesn’t need Shurochka Prokofort. Tecially has no need for. Instead he’s hiring small fry,Landsknechts, and starry-eyed kids hatched only yesterday. And now, my friend, I return to the beginning of our conversation: all moral foundations have been undermined. Immoral science turns out to be worse and more dangerous than immoral ignorance. . .”
 At th.
 “There you go aga. You’re confusts. There is no such thing as moral ignorance. A semiliterate can be moral. And an enterson, like our Vasilisa, can be moral. What follows from your words is that science is the antithesis of ignorance. That’s mistaken. Science is a way of organizing knowledge, while ignorance is the rejection of knowledge. Ignorance osition. Paracelsus, for example, knew less about the workings of the human body than the average doctor today, but there’s no way you could call him an ignoramus. He knew about the relativity of knowledge. Ignorance knows nothrecisely for that reason there can be no such thing as moral ignorance. Ignorance despises everything that it cannot access. It rejects everythoint of view. And, by the way, as far as science is concerned, I don’t think that science has a moral dimension. Knowledge does not have moral nuances, only people can be ecially not mathematics. . .”
 Goldberg chuckled, and the last of heeked out of the corners of his mouth.
 “Pashka, maybe you’re right, but that kind of rightness is not for me. If there rogress, the good of humankind, it means that science directed at achieving a certain conditional good is moral, while that which has no good in mind can go to the devil. It’s a reliquary.”
 “I’m sorry.” Pavel Alekseevless gesture. “By your logeasants’! Give me a break! ”
 They started ast, and the bright future. They cracked jokes, swore, chuckled, and drank a second bottle. Toward daybreak Ilya Iosot and cursed.
 “What an old fool I am! I forgot to call Valentina.”
 So he called Valent. She had already constructed a detahone—and from there to the regional KGB office, and then to the lawyer’s. Or first to the lawyer. . . The malace. . .
 Ilya Ioshone: there was no dial tone.
 “Your phone’s broken: there’s no dial tone. Valentina is going crazy. She, Pasha, is in her seventh month, you know. . .” Goldberg seemed to be apologizing.
 Pavel Alekseevted to dissuade Ilya Iosifovich from going home. It was almost five in the morning. And only after hed, and withered Ilya, and that—say what you will but—the real question had nothing to do with science or with whether it was moral or not very. The mahysiological accoutrements—kisses, embraces, erection, friction, and ejaculation. . . Pavel Alekseevich sighed: the seminal glands, the adrenal cortex. . . and androgens, several varieties of steroids. . . He tried to remember the formula for testosterone. . . And for thressed forever his hormonal surges, was tormented solely by his worries about Tanya, about his granddaughter Zhenya, and about his wife Elena, whom he would leave with Toma and Vasilisa when he left that Saturday for Piter to visit his dear little girls. . .
 20
 IN LENINGRAD LIFE SEEMED TO TANYA TO BE MORE PEDIgreed, wle had more substance to them, was that it? The past peeked out from under every bush, and you had to be a complete numbskull, lan on a wood mosaic table and never once in twenty years wonder to whom the table had belonged before. It had belonged to Zrecisely this room, having moved in as a young girl with her young husband. The can were also visible everywhere, which occasionally invoked a certain melancholy. There was no time, however, for melancholy: their little child did not allow it. Morning and daytime life were filled with things to be done, their bohemian, artistic life ensuing in the evening. They hired Aunt Shura, who for not very much money agreed to babysit Zhenya in the evenings and sometimes through the night. Tanya and Serge in those days—drinking, smoking, and dancing. From terform. Therivate variety.
 Dur to twelve hours a day between December and February. But when w. There she planned to beg Siberian stones that a geologist friend brought from the Urals.
 Tanya’s daughter was blessed winning it, and deriving from it masses of interest. Sergei came to love the little girl in the most natural of ways, just as Pavel Alekseevich had once come to love Tanya, so that few of their friends knew that the little girl was hardly Sergei’s daughter or Tanya—his wife. The couple did not bother with the issue of matrimony. Technically, neither of them was officially free: Sergei was married to Poluektova, and Tanya was married to Goldberg. The only problem that could possermit, which was required to get a job or to have access to health care. But Tanya had no letely healthy. Were anythlace the sick child in the best hands on earth. . . But nothened, not even a cold.
 Tanya rose early, loked through the local decaying bogs.
 The route from home to the workshop took at least an hour, wht for an hour in her carriage, which had become a tight fit. Tanya constructed large, deloraries, lovers of Petersburg jazz. Sut something on, all of her classmates immediately imitated her. . . For that reason, the fossible, hang out, and wait for customers.
 At lunchthone. He brought food from a takeout store and kefir for little Zhenka. Although she was more than a year old, she loved baby food and obvreferred liquids to solids. Tanya set the teakettle on the electred tea. Opinion was that he did that better than anyone else. They ate student-style. Like a true Petersburger he referred to white bread as buns and was careful not to waste food: the blockade had left its mark, although he, a sickly little boy, had been evacuated that year over the ice. . .
 Afterward he eent the rest of the day together until evening. When he stayed, he would llay with Zhenya.
 Theoint of view of digestion. He would hoounded out her own working beat with her mallet—metal against metal. Sergeace wasdivided into distinct niches, like the three melodic voices in New Orleans Dixieland. . .
 “We’re having a terrific jam session,” Sergei said to Tanya, who, beating out another cascade of blows, objected.
 “No, we have a marvelous family music box.”
 “Are you kidding? Music boxes make dead music. . .”
 “You’re right, you’re right,” Tanya agreed instantly.
 They dair in the never-ending Summer Garden had not a care for their daily bread, their health, or their bank accounts. Even the questid, handsome borzois. This was work, but Sergei was used to it, knew where to buy bones, what kind of meat to add, and who to get vitamins from. Two enormous pots never left the stove top, and there were tots, adding salt to taste.
 Of course, throblems. For example, the climate. It was cold. Or, for example, where to buy a bottle of vodka at night? From a taxi driver? Go all the way out to the aort? And there was the political order, which was disagreeable and at times downright dangerous. On the other hand, polices or wild beasts and venomous snakes. And other inconveniences. . .
 Everyone had it bad, while for these kids, in the 1960s, life was a wonderful time.
 That is difficult to believe—convincing evidence is required, a survey of eyewitnesses, the testimony of onlookers. Over the many years site the food rations PA brought home from work. Others remembered the invasion of Czechoslovakia. Searches and arrests. The underground. Gagarace. Radandemonium. Memories of howclosed-in life was, of fear dissolved in the air like sugar in tea.
 But these klay had a wonderful time. In their frivolity they lived without day-to-day fear, taking fright instead only for minutes at a time. Then, shruggtive music, which not just made them free, but was free in itself. Tharents. Thart. They were like sulfuric acid for each other. . . The chathy in the burnt-out hole. . .
 Sergearents had cut each other off long ago. His father referred to his son as none other than a bum and a renegade. Hlain whose faith he had violated with whom. Funny, but it couldn’t have been with music! From Sergei’s neighborhood friends his mother learned that he had a daughter. She yearned for reconc. Sergearents was stronger than hatred. He had not seen them for eight years already, since his grandmother’s death, having left home as soon as he finished school.
 “There is nothing human in them. Everything that they think and say and do is one big lie. Nothing human.” Talking about them wrenched his guts.
 His mother sent Sergei’s former classmate—Nina Kostikova, one of the neighborhood girls who had had a crush on him since first grade—to visit him. She had a m a family reunion.
 “What’s the big deal? ” Netitioned on Sergei’s mother’s behalf. “You could show them Zhenya.”
 “Tell her that the ked with joy. “Tell her that someone dropped her on my doorstep. In her mother’s lap.” He chuckled as if he were beingGod knows how witty.
 Tanya arched her brow.“So what’s wrong w? All right, next time I’ll deliver the kid right into your arms. . .”
 She had not forgotten about a new child. Several tregnant, but each time she was mistaken. She loved her lersistence, as if she were obliged to give birth to a boy for the sake of some unknown higher goals. From the vantage of their everyday existence a second child would be insanity. But the first one had not been any less so. They were completely bereft of so-called material resources. Although money came erformances, and Pavel Alekseevich, who came to visit his children once every six weeks or so, also always left them money. Thed that soon she herself would begin earning money. However, both of them—Sergelay. . .
 In the meantime Tanya had become increasingly more engrossed in music. She even got herself a recorder and conversed with it occasionally, on the sly from Seryozha. The oor, but the sound was touching and childish. . . Tanya ds, of which no small number had formed in Piter at the time. There were not that many truly worthwhile musicians: you could count them on one hand. Sergeoser as well. Later Sergei became disenchanted with him and got hooked on Vladimir Chekasin. . . But in general everyone was mad over Coltrane and Coleman. Each new album was a celebration; Sergei even celebrated the anniversary of the first time he had heard each album. He and Garhrasing. Though Tanya far preferred lletely understood what they were talking about: though it was not extensive, she did have musical training.
 The most fortunate of theerson in different directions. Tanya’s love, famle—was organized. The analogy amused her, and early  and Zhenya was already cooing in her crib, she would give herself over to a sonata-like allegro, a dual-themed harmony in which the first theme, Sergei’s, was initially stronger and more voluminous, then subsided and conceded to the child’s line, which was burbling and joyful. She caught the andante on the dark street, pusheak, the most indistinct, beginning at the Petrogradskaya embankment.
 At her workshop the mus before lunch. After that Tanya smoked her first cigarette of the day and went to her workbench. Here she was overtaken by the scherzo, whing Sergei, who would arrive toward lunchtime. A ritulation: AEACADAE.
 In spring the music season began. Tanya wanted to go wetrovsk and then to Crimea. Toward the end of the w with one of them, The Square, soured. Sergeid conflict with one of the city’s jazz elders, first with Goloukhin, then with Lisovsky. Tanya, by that time already familiar to a certain extent with the ins and outs of jazz life and having made the acquaintance of many musicians, thought that Sergei should leave Garik. They played great together, but Garik never gave Sergei the amount of freedom he had grown to deserve. Sergeosing. Garlaying my music. . .”
 Sergei was bitter. Tanya—all the more. It even seemed to her that the moment had arrived for her to get involved and direct the situation a bit. In the wlay with Dixieland. Why not play with someone else? Garik wasn’t the only show in town. . . She called her father and asked whetherhe was still burning with desire to take Zhenya for the summer. If so, the two of them would come and live for a while in Moscow so that she got used to everyone. . .
 In the middle of May Pavel Alekseevich met Tanya and Zhenya at the Leningrad train station. He neatly finished off all of his duties at work by the end of the month. Now he wanted only one thorridge in the morning, take her for walks, try to figure out her incoherent words and first thoughts. The women eration, was very weak. Toma helped hletely unused.
 His granddaughter, whom he had visited in March, had not forgotten him and stretched out her little hand and turned her check for him to kiss. He kissed her creamy skin and was filled with hot air, like an aerostat. . .
 Tanya spent a week living at home. She dlace, digging out all the corners. She washed the windows. She was very tender wed on the bathhouse’s stone floor. Toma rarely agreed to accompany her. In addlans for Saturdays. The bathhouse was not far away, on Seleznevskaya Street, and Vasilisa always brought her own basin, loofah—wherever did she get them? —smelly tar soap, and fresh change of underwear. For the f. Feel off her thick coat, which was somewhat binding in the sleeves, then bent down and removed her all-weather felt boots. Nowadays she dressed year-round for the winter, just like a real old woman from the village. Vased wearing shoes several years ago. . . Vasrecation: “Well, miss, I’ve lived to see the day. . .”
 Then Vasatched underwear. Her nakedness was as abject as her clothing. A gray, wriderlike rib cage with a big crucifix that hung down almost to her navel. Lookrudishness Vasilisa at the bathhouse took off her inhibitions along with her clothes. Tanya noticed hanging between her legs a rosy-gray fist-sized little sack that was relatively disgusting to look at. . .
 “Vasya, what’s that hanging between your legs? ”
 Vasilisa bent over slightly, squatted a bit, and with an awkward movement stuck the hanging little sack back inside.
 “It’s my charts, Tanechka. It red off. In 1930, when we were pulling a cart. . . It’s nothin’, nothin’. . . It doesn’t get sick. . .”
 Tanya sat her down on the bench, put the basin with hot water under her legs, took a bathhouse basin full of water, and started to wash her with the loofah. Vasleasure. . .
 Awful, just awful. . . She worked for us all her life, carried bags, washed windows, ironed laundry with a two-ton iron. . . Reladder. . . In the house of the country’s leading gynecologist. . . Should I tell Dad? Awful, just awful. . . Standosed to do with you all? Vasenka, am I supposed to move back home .. . Why are you all grown so old. . .”
 The place was noisy with voices and flowing water, and Vasilisa did not hear her.
 “Enough. We’ve had our good time. Now we have to get back home,” Tanya said to herself. And she despaect of life in their old house between aging Vasilisa and her out-of-her-mind mother, with her daughter, and with Seryozha. . . The most ainstaking cleaning. . . Poor Dad, how does he bear it all? Then she remembered hty bottle between the desk’s two columns of drawers. . . What if she were to have Toma quit her job and take care of the house? Then she realized immediately that she should be ashamed at the thought.
 When Tanya brought steam-mellowed Vas out with the housework, then move them all out there and leave them there till fall. In the fall, after she returned to town, she would move to Moscow. With Sergei. . . The last po for question. . . But, ultimately, they could rent a room. . . And people played jazz everywhere!
 21
 TOMA DID NOT LIKE CHILDREN. SHE DID NOT LIKE childhood—her own or anyone else’s—or anything connected with having children. One doesn’t need Freud to understand her profound repulsanies coitus, towhich she had been witness since childhood. Her mother’s festerle in the courtyard—and her undignified death were the stuff of Toma’s nightmares. Whenever Toma fell erature climbed, it seemed to her that she lay in the family lair. She would open her eyes, and there would be Elena George her wet brow. . . Pavel Alekseevarent glass rabbit the size of a real mouse. Later she lost the rabbit at the dacha, or one of their dacha neighbors had stolen it, and there was much grief. Another t thing she didn’t know what to do with. He brought Toma the present and kissed Elena Georgievna on the head as she sat alongside the bed. To Toma le. They even slept in different rooms.
 A lot of what Toma saw lace between husband and wife, in fact not since the moment she had entered their home. . .
 As for the manresents every evening, and these daily treats reconciled them with their illness. When Tanya was resents, for both girls, the sick one and the healthy one. But if Toma was ill, he brought nothing for Tanya. . .
 For that reason, Toma was certain that Pavel Alekseevich loved her more than Tanya. Her understandle. But Toma had always preferred slex. . .
 In the Kukotsky household there was no talk of fairness. And nothing was divided equally. At datties. But Tanya frequently refused the second. Vasilisa did not eat meat at all. For a long while Toma thought that Vasilisa was not given meat“out of fairness,” that is, because she was a servant. Later it turned out that Vasilisa herself did not want the meat. But, after havieces, which she ate in the morning, in secret from everyone. Which meant that there was a certain kind of fairness here. Toma once crept iece: it was absolutely tasteless. There was absolutely nothecial about it at all.
 Lieces, and they fought constantly over food. Her mother also argued with everyone on various counts, and the arguments—even fistfights—were always over fairness. Wecially at the outset. In the summer at the dacha Pavel Alekseevset.
 “I’m not going to eat your slush! Give it to the children. . .”
 Just as wlate. . .
 Now, though, after Zhenya had appeared in the household, Toma finally came to understand the joy of giving. It was amuserienced this for the first time at the same dacha with the same first strawberries grown in their“own” garden. There were only eleven of these froudly on the table one Sunday morning, saying: “The first are yours. . .”
 Pavel Alekseevlate. Once agalate. Pavel Alekseevlaced one in his mouth and another in Zhenya’s. Zhenya popped her berrs in delight. . .
 Vasilisa muttered something that sounded as if strawberries were also included in her fast. And here, watchleasure written on her berry-juice-smattered face, Toma understood how she would get more enjoyment watching the child eat them than eating them herself. . .
 And so ened, unnoticed by all, that Toma came to love Zhenya, her niece, as she called her. . .
 The little girl was living at her grandfather’s house for a second year. Pavel Alekseevich thought that the child should be with them until Tanya got her life in order. And so it came to be that last year’s dacha season had stretched over a whole year. Tanya was not able to move to Moscow. She had come to visit rather frequently for several days at a time, but only now, toward the beginning of July, had things begun to settle down. Just before reterative building—for Toma. The former g was not hers alone, but her family’s, together with Sergei and Zhenya.
 The separate apartment Pavel Alekseevay for with his own money was a fairy-tale fantasy come true for Toma. The bus to Leninsky Avenue, the far end, and walked around the already finished construction and even stood alongside the entrance to her future front door. She had been given an estate, her own island, as a result of which she reevaluated in her head everyone around her in relation to herself: her own worth, it seemed to her, had grown immeasurably. . . Among her coworkers, especossessed a similar treasure. What was more, she startment was being built for her, and not for Tanya, their own daughter, who, in addition to everything else, had a family of sorts of her own.
 Certainly, the same idea had occurred to Pavel Alekseevich before it had to Toma. Moreover, he had discussed it with his daughter during one of her visits to Moscow. He had begun the conversatartment for her family. But Tanya, without a minute’s hesitation, had refused: her sole motivation for returning to Moscow was “our old girls, who are falling further into decline, and I’m moving here in order to take care of them. . .” Pavel Alekseevich was hurt by Tanya’s condescending use of the word “old girls” in reference to both Elena and Vasilisa. . .
 Breakhones at once. And he succeeded at all of it. Hositions—“Black Stones.”
 Tanya worked a lot: her black stones were becom of Poluektova, who had come from Perm for the holidays. True, durertoire. She even liked Tanya, and her own life in Perm was on a steady rise. Her classes were consirit, and a certain dose of good nature that was entirely out of character. Tanya presented Poluektova w for Tanya’s jewelry. Tanya barely managed to keep up with the orders. Tanya herself had become an remieres to closed at-home concerts. Tanya now wore short black dresses, and her dyed brown ha shoulder blades. Trletely still. But the mat Sergei—not even to Pavel Alekseevich. It was decoverished stuff and drawing the line at the end of their Petersburg life, they would move to Moscow—to give birth to a son, raise Zhenya, and take care of the old folks. That the diness and strength, so fearless and carefree, that she even rushed time a bit. Whleasure from day to day. . .
 The tour began—whecially delightful—in Odessa at that same International Sailors’ Club where Tanya had first seen Sergei. Here they celebrated the theoretical third anniversary of their union. There were no performances in Kurortnoe this year, but they hired a car for a day and went out there. Nothlantations. They descended the precarious staircase to the colorless sea. Over those three years e of the cliff.
 “Not for the tsy,” Tanya noted. Sergei offered his hand. She took hletely sure of her footing.
 They went for a swim and decided to take a look at the dunes. The dr above. A nates about Odessans. He dropped them off at the sandbar, at the same place where three years ago Garik’s car had got stuck. Tanya and Sergei headed for the sandbar. It was a weekday, there were practty bottles lay scattered, half-covered with sand. It wasn’t as hot, as burning sticky hot as it had been then. A breeze blew in from the sea. It fluttered Tanya’s red sundress—she had put ecially so that everything would be as it had been. They sked. They lay down on the sand in the half-shade of the half-ruins. . . Tanya embraced Sergeonded. Now everything was different. They had matured and grown careful. They feared dianissimo and legato—was of an entirely different variety from their first stormy andunconscious time. But both ways were good. . .
 Placered in his ear.
 “Our lotbellied squirt. . .”
 Then Sergei took a bottle of wine, two tomatoes, some eggs, and greens from his bag. The green onion was yellowed and mature. The bread crumbled. Tanya chewed a liece. The food would not go down. She drank two gulps of wine, and, after collecting the remains, they headed back to the car. As they walked, Tanya’s nose began to bleed. Sergeress. The blood stopped quickly. They had to hurry, because there was a performance in the evening.
 They arrived an hour before it began. Tanya was nauseated, and her head and leg muscles ached. She wanted to put on her evens, a gay little number that stretched over her stomach—but at the last minute decided to stay in the room. She lay down and fell asleep immediately. But she quain. She placed her hands on her belly and asked: “So, how are you? ”
 The little boy did not answer. Apparently, everything was okay with him. She should probably take an aspirin. But, fills. Just before Sergei returned, the nosebleed began again.
 “Maybe we should call a doctor? ” Sergei began to worry.
 Tanya puckered her ls: she did not want medical care. Durroud to have avoided all the ado women today make over so natural and healthy an affair as having a baby. . . A ben bottle of wine and a sealed bottle of vodka. Tolya deless alcoholic would drink vodka in the South in the summer. Winter was a different matter. . .
 “I don’t like the way you look, old girl,” Garik announced from the threshold. “You’re not jumping, just bitter-bitter sobbing. . . Think what you will, but I’m calling an ambulance. . .”
 He headed resolutely for the phone. The phone was dead.
 Tanya stopped Garik.
 “Let’s wait until morning. . . I’d like to drink some tea with lemon. And, to hell wirin. . .”
 They brought Tanya her tea, and after takirin she felt better. She fell asleep. She woke up at four o’clock in the morning, vomiting. Thtion desk, and called an ambulance.
 An elderly Jewess quital right away. She spoke reading along the wall of her belly.
 Tanya tried to object, but the old doctor would not listen to her, as if she were a senseless child, and turned instead to Sergei.
 “Her liver has descended by almost more than two inches. I refuse to accept that konsibility. What did you bring me out here for? To talk? If you want to get meditalize her immediately. Explain to your wife that she could lose the child.”
 For some reason she did not take a liking to Tanya either and did not even look in her direction.
 Tanya was taken away, and after that all hell seemed to break loose. A pe broke in the club, closing it for technical reasons. Theerformance was canceled. They spent the whole day with only their worries, and Tolya Aleksandrov got drunk as a result, which in and of itself was nothing terrible, but he got into a fight in some beer hall and was socked hard right in the eye. Sergehysician, who had either just left or not yet arrived. Then the weekend came, and there was no physatient. All the staff knew perfectly well that he was on a drinking binge and not coming to work.
 No one was allowed athology section: it was quarantined. Everythut on hold. Even the weather deteriorated, and it started to rain.
 Tanya was getting sicker and sicker, and the moment had come when she herself began to get scared. She discovered a black-and-blue mark on her left forearm, and a similar bruise on her side. The back of her head continued to throb. Her belly hurt wain. Nurses came and took her temperature, felt her belly, and measured her blood pressure. . . Her temperature was normal.
 Tanya felt worse and worse; on the third day she decided to summon her father.
 She got paper and a pencil from her neighbor and wrote a note to Sergei asking him to call her father in Moscow and tell him to come. Notes were passed by tossing them out the window. On Saturday mornerate. He ost office and sent Pavel Alekseevich a telegram.
 Toward evenhone. Usually v to their Veras and Galyas from the dusty lawn below, and the women would hang their milk-swollen breasts and victorious smiles out the window. Among the dozen or so local, fresh-baked poppas—sailors, criminals, and merchants—Sergei was the only one who was thin, long-haired, and sober. Moreover, what he experarently, because his ulcer, healed over long ago, did not exactly hurt, but was sendingominous signals. . .
 Tanya was on the third floor, but Sergei decided not to shout from the lawn. He took heak slowly.
 Tan-ya. . .
 Tanya heard, but was not able to come to the window right away. When she lin, and a wave of nausea came over her. But her stomach had been emptasms, she dragged herself to the window. Her legs ached desperately w, while her belly seemed to be filled with lead. . . She popped her head out the window only after Sergei had extracted his mournful“Tan-ya” for the third time from the thin metal throat of his instrument.
 At f of her head, just as her mother had worn hers all her life. And the hosprison shirt made her seem strange and bulky. . . She waved her hand: the gesture was Tanya’s own, imitable by no one. Lookarately.
 Sergehone in his hands. Hrotruded—right inside was that tender callus she could touch with her tongue. . . He held the saxophone—a generally sly turned outward. . . Among the wedantically curled brass cornet with its silly valve mechanisms; and the snail-twirled stately French horn. . . And what about the oboe’s bell? Or the funnel of the trumpet, curled back to the depths of its soul? The saxophone, of course, was not the most perfect, but the overtones of h, or sorrow. And, hone—mutually resonated each other. . . Together the two of them were capable of uttering that which Sergei never could on his own. He placed the reed between h-blue A-note said: “Let’s begin! ”
 And they, Sergeortant. It was Coltrane’s “Gossibilities ended, and then carefully descending down the blues scale, and Tanya began to recognize something vaguely familiar, something she had heard many times. . . perhaps Haden’s “Always Say Good-bye”. . . or something like it. . . or Seryozha’s. . .
 She remembered how she had writal three years ago, in Piter, when she had given birth to Zhenka. . . About how wonderfully they—Sergeoke nonsense. . . Now the musoke distinctly, gravely, and not at allglibly. . . , as arent language: say good-bye, say good-bye. . . always. . . forever say good-bye. . . The small sounds—sharp, jagged, metallic—were just as unrelenting as they were marvelous. . .
 Tanya held her pain-wracked belly with both hands. Would he really d that hung slightly over the lower. . . Poor Pavlik. . . Poor unborn Pavlik. . .
 Sergei did not see Tanya alive again. Nor did Pavel Alekseevich. He arrhysician, informing him of the death of Tatiana Pavlovna Kukotskaya.
 A day later Pavel Alekseevotted tin, and it was the bitterest moment of his life. The delroduced by the various organs, were already all shut down. She was an olsy sutures of the like to indict these so-called doctors of a grave crime against nature. He had already seen the forensort. They also showed him her backdated case history. The enthysician down to the last nurse—froze in horror, awaiting retribution. Wregnancy had only made the situation worse. . . and that he would have been able to save his little girl, had he arrived from the dacha not on Tuesday, but on Friday. . .
 Tanya’s resemblance to her mother was incredible and tormenting. A quarter century ago he had stood exactly the same way over young Elena, close to death, and had seen her gathered chestnut harecisely the same angle.
 “Never. Elena wsed long ago. . . ?
 He proceeded to the chhysician’s office and asked him to gather the section heads. The chted to object, but Pavel Alekseevich cast him such a general’s look, that he rushed to call his secretary to invite them all immediately to his office. Five minutes later six doctors sat in the office. The forensatient’s history lay before Pavel Alekseevich.
 “Thecial investigation,” uttered Pavel Alekseevich. The doctors exchanged glances. “The quantity of blunders, errors, and medical crimes exceeds all bounds. A patathology ward. No berformed. No diagnosis was made. I am assuming that what we have here is Weil’s disease,Morbus Weili. If irosis, then immediate measures need to be taken.”
 The forensathologist—a deformed little Asian with dyed whiskers, was terribly nervous.
 “Excuse me, colleague, but we have no grounds for such conclusions. You saw the report, and we gave you an opportunity to conduct an examination of the. . . corpse? body? ” Whiskers hesitated for a second, “Patient? What grounds do you have? ”
 “Focal degeneratetechiae. The patond to nothing. There was toxicosis. Intravenous infusions, indicated here, were not administered. I examined the veins. . . I am left to conclude that no treatment whatsoever was given. But that’s not the issue right now. Your maternatitis.”
 Pavel Alekseevidemiologist. A fever ran through the cremises.
 Pavel Alekseevital. On the fourth he boarded a traefaction. In the trale folds of white gauze were visible.
 Went everything he had, Sergei also—they bought four bottles of vodka. They drank the warm vodka a long tackage—there wasn’t anything else—in silence. .. Then Serget until they reached Moscow. Pavel Alekseeving young man and looked at his tormented face. He was faed with redness. Hustules. . . The corners of hs twitched. In h he stroked the case and mumbled something. Pavel Alekseevich did not catch the words. He was theared in their home: this dear young man and the little one who was not to be. . . He also thought about what had happened to hregnancy, had been unable to filter it. . . Pavel Alekseevrimer, stood before his eyes. . .
 Everything had been arranged. Vitalik Goldberg met them at the Kursk train station. At the German cemetery the fams away from Doctor Haass. There lay Pavel Alekseevich’s grandfather and great-grandfather. And now, laced to rest there. No one besresent at the burial.
 Sergeend the night. Sergei did. The apartment was empty, summery, dusty. Pavel Alekseevill. They drank vodka. Then Serge on Toma’s couch. He, Tanya, Zhenya, and the losed to have moved into this room several months later.
 22
 IN PITER, SERGEI TOLD NO ONE OF HIS ARRIVAL. HE. He did not have keys: they were back in Odessa with Tanya’s things. He easicked the lock. There was the same mess they had left when leaving. A coffeepot abandoned in haste stood unwashed in the sink. A mysterot. Tanya’s black dress hung on a wooden hanger on the wall. Her h of the other. . . On the eve of thearty at the house of a young director who intended to invite him for some sort of vaguely enticing staging. . . Lord, and the bed wasn’t made ereserved the indentation of their heads. . .
 Sergeillow, and the smell scalded him. She was still here. On the whiral. Under the pushed to the side. St.
 He woke up after an artments—and locked. The key to the toilet hung on a nail near the entrance, but Sergei for some reason decided that it was on Tanya’s key ring in Odessa.
 He lay down to sleep again, this time having undressed. Tanya’s smell intensified each time he crawled out of the bed and returned to it again. All that remaants. He would keep them for an indeterminate number of days and nights. He fell asleep, then woke up. He drank water from the tap. He pissed in the sink. He had no appetite. His unfed stomach idled.
 At long last he crawled out from under the blanket and sat down at Tanya’s workbench. He touched her tools and her moldings. The metal said nothing to him about Tanya. But when he opened the motley tin box with the black stones, he could not tear his eyes from them for a long time. They seemed to have preserved the touch of her hands: polhrite, and his very favorite—the translucent obsidian. . . He selected two at random and put them ocket. Then he grabbed h. The door, not fastened wed in the doorway: the lock was broken. He turned back, found a hammer with a nail remover, and a large nail. He hammered the nail from the outside into the doorframe and with a strike of the hammer bent it so that the door seemed locked. Then he put the hammer under the doormat so that there would be something to extract the nail with when he came back. A strange thought ran through his head: but will I come back?
 Poluektova—whom everyone considered a world-class shrew, but whom Sergei knew was still a human being even though she really was a bitch—had assumed that he was stuck in Moscow. Garik had called Piter from Odessa and informed everyone of Tanya’s death. He also had said that Sergei had set off for Moscow with the coffin. All of Seryozha’s friends were certain that he would remain there.
 Sergeartment. In any case, he rang the doorbell, not at all sure that anyone would open the door for him. The door was opened by the m of her head.
 “What do you want? ” she asked and stopped short. She had not recognized Sergei at first. He was thale and slightly jaundiced, and looking totally deranged. Gray bounded toward hs. . . He stood ilot.
 Poluektova gasped and began shoutrattle.
 “So you couldn’t call, could you? I’m leaving today. Damn, id. Don’t dare say anything. I know all about it. Anything but about that. . . I’m taking the dogs with me. That’s it. Why didn’t you call, scarecrow? I’ve rented the apartment. Maybe, I should have left it for you? Don’t dare say anything to me! ”
 She hugged hal. . . It always happened that way wstanding. . . That is, at just that moment, it seemed as if someone like that was about to bite. . . How to avoid jinxing it? A man with no artistic inclinations whatsoever: exactly what she needed. Gremin, Gremin. An honest-to-goodness general. . .
 She stroked Seryozha’s dushed him away.
 “Go take a bath. I’m making you something to eat.”
 He went to the bathroom, turned on the water, whtuously from the faucet, and realized that he had not bathed since Odessa. . . He lay down in the almost unbearably hot water and began to sob. . .
 Poluektova-the-blans: he did not need to meet her train; she was returning her tickets and staying on for at least a week. Her former husband, who had just been wlace like an avalanche, and she was going to have to take care of him, because there was no leaving him alone in this condition. . .
 The Ser, strong, and real woman he had found himself, even if she was a ballerina with a flat hard chest and a back as muscular as a new recruit’s. He smiled and quietly relished the resuscitation occurring below his belt: never in his life had he had such a woman; he had never even thought that they existed. . .
 A week was not enough for Poluektova. She cared for Sergelay. The very same day when, after the long hast of awhore and the future of the grand dame of a region large enough to accommodate fifteen Belgiums, eight Frances, and five Germanys all at once. . .
 23
 WHILE ON DUTY ONE NIGHT AT THE PRECINCT, KUPCHINO resrisoner. Not more than usual, within limits, but toward morning the guy died.
 The guy turned out to work at a museum. And all because of that skansy dick-licker, Semion got into so much trouble that his whole life took a left turn. They kut you in the slammer. . . His wife left him and moved with their daughter to Karelia. Then h for him, not to mention fed him—died. Then, after all thlayground, with a little house for crawling into, a sandbox, and a carved wooden bear. They straital. He was treated for almost a year, then released back to hchino. Whidola” radio receiver left over from better times.
 Semrofession. They gave hension, but a small one. Fortunately, he dension barely covered food. He had a good appetension. In the hosput on a lot of weight, and now he needed more than before. The way he saw it, a skinny guy doesn’t need as much nourishment as someone with meat on his bones. He would have looked for a job somewhere—as an armed guard someplace, for example, but they wouldn’t take him because he’d been severed from the militia. He tr out of habit. They caught hants shit as that museum worker the whole ruckus in the militia was about, fired him.
 Once again Semion was left with nothing. That was when he was overcome by enormous anger at those sk his whole life. That was when Sem his shiv. Th, thicker than a knitting needle, but thinner than a file. He’d kept it at home for a long time, since his militia days when he took it away from a thief they’d hauled in. Why he pocketed it, he didn’t know. He stuck it in his sleeve, tucking the blade under the band of his wristwatch. The watch was broken and hadn’t worked for a long time, but now it came in handy. It was a crafty setup.
 Semartment buildings, about twenty minutes by foot from the suburban train station. On May 1, 1961, hleted his first mission. He strolled down to the tra, got on a suburban train, and rode to the Vitebsk train station. From there he turned left down Zagorodny Avenue, and, not hurryassersby, set off in the direction of the Technological Institute. There e he needed. It was only after eants (with a thin little briefcase) came by. He was drunk as well. He wasn’t lookot, a dark corner, to release the fast-flowing beer. After he had splashed hosed to go, slightly to the side and between the ribs. At f against a dense film, but after that it was like cutting butter. . . In, and out. The guy oohed, fell nose-fed without even turning around. Semital treatments.
 Hlace November 7, also without a hitch. Now he already knew that next year on May 1, he would celebrate his holiday as his heart desired: he’d shiv that shit, the skinny faggot, that worthless kike. . .
 He’d been coming to this courtyard for three years. The trench had been covered over long ago, and people came through not in big streams, but in trickles. In May when it was light—more; in the November darkness—fewer. Seme recorder; the third was carrying two cake boxes tied together with string. Some he’d already forgotten. Fe immediately. Then he’d catch up with him, stick to him for a second, then grab him with his right hand by the shoulder and strike with his left. Semion was a lefty retrained at school so he wrote with his right hand and did other things with both, but more easily with his left.
 He had already scored seven when once, wht for March 8, once a year, when he killed women. At frised, but a few secondslater he figured out that they were talking about him. They exaggerated, of course, the number of years and about the holidays. But basically they had it right. Two weeks later, passoster reading: “Wanted. . .” There were three photographs—twomen and one woman con arth. The only th arches over the eyebrows and the buzz cut.
 Semiece of macaroni. It was close to November, and he decided that year not to go out of the house on the seventh. The manhunt drovoked him. From the seventh through the eighth he sat at home, barely able to control himself, his hands even shaking. On the ninth he went out. And carried off his mission quite well and successfully. The guy had nothing in his hands, but on his face he had this chi-chi little beard, and he was for sure a stinking faggot. . .
 After each mission Semion always felt better. He was even earning money now from time to time in a furniture store as a loader. Only just before the holt to recollect where he had hidden the shiv. He hside down before he found it. He’d put  against the wall. . . Now he decided that he was going to detour the holidays, going out two or three days earlier or later. . . The militia was nothing but a bunch of idiots, that Semion knew well. They’d been told to search on the holidays, and there’d be no getting them out on any others.
 In November of 1966 number ten’s turn had come. But Semut things off not for three days, but for a whole week. He even thought that maybe he would sk this time. But it didn’t work out that way. The urge to go hunting beckoned. Only on the fut on his cherished watch, loaded the shiv, and left the house when it was still light, right after three. As always, he rode the train to the Vitebsk station and headed down Zagorodny Avenue. Instead, though, of turning in the direction of the Technological Institute, he went in the other direction, toward Moskovsky Avenue. . .
 He dchino and rarely made his way into the city. His mother always used to say it that way: we’ll go into the city. . . In school they took them on fs several times. And hrison in the Kursk oblast. So he wound up neither an urbanite nor a villager, but a lifelong outlier, who couldn’t saddle a horse or find his way to the football stadium. . . Before servlaces. . .
 Moskovsky Avenue led him to a square. He looked at the last house: the sign read PEACE SQUARE. It was crawlle. There were lots of stores here. The square was odd-shaped, with lots of little side streets coming into it. Turning into one of the narrower and quieter ones, he thought to himself that he’d been wrong not to go to the Technological Institute, where he knew his way around. But the lane he was moving down now was, overall, just what he needed. Sem as wells, and not one of them had two exits. . . Then he walked  archway and stood near the door of a former servants’ entrance that exited into the archway. PAWNSHOP read the modest little sign on the securely closed door. Occasassed by, but his view was blocked and he couldn’t make anyone out. Furthermore, there were mostly women wing bags. It occurred to Semion that more young guys came out on the streets during the holidays, while there were mostly only middle-aged women on weekdays.
 Then he trly began to tremble he was so right. . . By comparly didn’t count. The guy wore a jeans jacket that was too big for him; he was skinny, and for sure worked at a museum. A blond gonytail swung down his back. And he was walking slowly and real laid back. Semecial, not regular shoes. . . In hle carried. Semed. It was like love at first sight, like a flame of recognition. Semiercing sensation. At that moment he felt no hate; he was overwhelmed by the ecstasy of the hunter enraptured by his beautiful quarry. . .
 But tht walking around him. Sems behind. He got the urge to look at his face again and crossed over to the other side of the street, got in front of him, then walked toward him face-to-face. H in thought. Faggot, now I’ll get you. . .
 Semion walked behind him again. They passed one courtyard entrance, and whulled the end of the shiv out from under his watchband. When they were even wlaced his right hand on the guy’s shoulder, and set the shiv in motion with his left. The ull. . .
 The guy sward, then began falling forward, but Semion did not let him fall, grabbing him with both hands by the shoulders and shoving him into the archway.
 The guy wanted to drop, but Sem into the archway and wanted to leave him in the courtyard, so that the body lying on the ground would not be visible from the street. But just then the door of the servants’ entry opened, and a huge, decent-looking man came out and looked inquiringly at Semion.
 Semt out of the archway. He ran straight ahead, along the deserted lane, with no route in mind and only one thought in his head: he’d not managed to retrieve the shiv.
 TWO CIRCUMSTANCES SAVED SERGEI’S LIFE. THE FIRST was the shiv, which had stuck in his heart. The second was the decent-look, formerly a medico. Holden door for someone to call an ambulance and to bring down a bandage. . .The doctors who revericardium told him later: “It was a miracle, Seryozha, a miracle. One in a million.”
 Sergehysical evidence, and so he never even saw it.
 Semion was arrested two days later. He was accused of twenty-se. He confessed to his“own,” but denied and refused to admit to the others. But it had already been decided on high that all the militia’s “cold cases” be hung on him. They gave hlemented a half-year later. No appeal was entered, and no psycherformed. . .
 Part Four
 [Картинка: _1.jpg]
 1
 EVERY TIME ZHENYA STOPPED IN FRONT OF THE DOOR OF the apartment where she had spent her chlex of emotions: affection, anger, melancholy, and tenderness. The door was battered and chlate with her deceased grandfather’s surname was tarnished. Alongs. It reeked of destartment.
 Zhenya had not had keys since they changed the old lock. It just happened that way: they hadn’t taken her key away, they just forgot to give her a new one. Zhenya asked once, but they ignored her request. . . She rang the bell. Toma hobbled down the corring with her cane. The poor th again.
 “Zhenechka, is that you? ”
 She opened the door. And gasped.“How round you’ve got! ”
 Meeked out of Granny’s room. “How unfaroached herself. “They don’t stink on Sundays. They take baths on Saturdays.”
 Zhenya’s s.
 “How are you, Mikhail Fedorovich? ”
 All the time he had served in the army, he had always greeted his senior officers first. Now, olyclinic he was assigned to. . .
 Mortance,“. . . day.” With no name. And remained standing in the doorway. Which was unusual.
 Zhenya removed her shoes, bending over her stomach first from the right side, then from the left. Wers and set off down the corridor to Granny’s room. Toma stopped her.
 “Zhen, we’ve done some rearranging. Rozina’s relatives gave us their big bookcase. It dut it in here. . . Merfect, so we moved Granny to Vasilisa’s room. . .”
 The blood rushed to Zhenya’s head. By hook or by crook. They’d chucked Grandma out antry.
 “What do you mean? ” Zhenya’s chin trembled with rage. Mer and magazine cuttings about aviation. . .
 “What difference does it make to her? She didn’t even notice. It’s peaceful and quiet in there. We took out Vasut a table in. She can eat there too. Vasilisa, rest her soul, always ate there.”
 M in at any moment.
 Zhenya held back and said nothing. She went to the kitchen without even looking into the room that last week had been her granny’s and would always be Granny’s. . .
 She walked through the kantry. They had not changed anything in there since Vasilisa’s death. There were the two large arating it from the swarthy hand. . . So where are you now, all you helpless helpers?
 Granny was sitting on a bentwood chair with a hole cut through the seat, her face toward the tiny window that looked out onto a solid brick wall. A bucket stood under the chair. The pantry smelled of urine and aged infirmity. One gray cat slept on the blanket that covered the trestle bed. Elena Georged side.
 Zhenya kins. The old woman stroked the cat’s side.
 “Hi, Babulya. Why did you. . .” Zhenya began agon silent in this shameful, intolerable situation. “We’re going to take a bath now. . .”
 The old woman silently stroked her on the hand. In the king. Toma and her husband divided everything in half, the housework included. They peeled the four potatoes airs: two for him, two for her. For reasons of family fairness.
 Zhenya headed for the bathroom. As she passed through the kotatoes.
 The bathroom was, as always, beyond descrtion. Wet laundry hung on lines. Saturday was bath day. Half the day they prepared, and half the day they washed. And then they relaxed—with tea, candies, and ginger cookies. A patriarchal family scene. Everything totally serious. On Sunday morning, before Zhenya’s arrival, the week’s laundry was done in the tiny washing machine Mikhail Fedorovich had bought for the needs of his small family. He was squeamish, and washing Granny’s nasty linen in the machine was not allowed.
 Zhenya pulled a washbasin out from under the old footed bathtub. From the z and soiled. The ders she used to buy had gone unused: Toma thought that they were synthetic, and Mikhail Fedorovich did not tolerate synthetics. Zhenya had stopped brartment for Granny long ago: Toma would immediately take away anything new, saying:“Oh, Zhen, what a swell nightshirt this is: good enough to get buried in. . .”
 At moments lrogress. She was wriritual successor of her famous mentor, Pavel Alekseevich Kukotsky. That mossibly have been the case. . .
 Zhenya sorted the pile on the stool-bench, where she would sit Granny for her bath. Old washbasins, one inside the other, jars, and raggedy loofahs. How close-fisted they were. . .
 Turnushed it under the bathtub. After the bath would come laundry. She cleaned out the bathtub. The faucets dred, and water collected under the tub. Everything was shabby, but cleverly fixed to get by. Matches. Wonder what he did in aviation?
 At long last, everything was ready. The water was a bit hotter than needed. It would cool down while she got Granny ready. At the last moo into the water. To make foam. Toma never used anything that Zhenya brought into the house. She and Moo: they couldn’t stand anything foreign. Patriots they were. Not soap, not medicine, not clothing. Their line for everything was “ours, made in the. . .” How pathetic. . .
 Zhenya lifted her grandmother from her chair.
 “Let’s go, Babulya, everything’s ready.”
 Elena Georg. Her back was straight, her legs thin and long, slightly bent by old age. . . Zhenya held her by her fragile shoulders and led her off. Granny walked well, but her torn house slers with their unglued sole got in the way. Three pairs, if not more, of new ones were in Toma’s room. Oh, how grudging. . .
 They went inside the bathroom. Granny pointed to the latch with her finger. Zhenya locked it. Slowly Granny undressed. She seemed to want Zhenya to help her, but resisted at the same time. She fought with the button of her robe. She had forgotten how to undo buttons. She was straining to remember. She couldn’t.
 Zhenya helped her to undress.
 Damn, what was Toma thinking of when she invented those idiotic elastic bands under her knees. Why couldn’t she put der underneath her?
 They undressed.
 “Okay, now raise your leg. The right one. Hold on to me.”
 Zhenya’s stomach was in the way. A lot in the way.
 “Now the other. . .” Elena Georgievna lifted her long legs easily. Her foot was awful. The nails were covered with yellowish-gray fungus. Her bunion stuck out. How could someone who had worn only house sled a bunion? Elena Georg in water and could not figure out how to sit down. Her figure. . . Her bone structure was highly symmetrical. Her waist small, her sides angled. Her breasts were small and not at all droopy, and her nles were fresh. Her stomach was flat, her navel hidden inside a horizontal fold. Another fold hid a scar beneath her navel. Her body was haer. Her face was white too. The only hairs growing were under her chin. Zhenya used to tweeze them, but now she just cut them with scissors. There wasn’t enough time. There was too littletime. She had no idea how she was going to manage when the baby was born. . . Probably, she’d have to take Granny to her place on Profsoartment. In Dad’s old apartment with the two connected rooms there was room for all of them. But Toma might object. . .
 “Sressed her grandmother lightly on her back. Granny cautiously sat down. Zhenya directed the stream from the shower over her. Granny moaned wleasure. Now what would happen was what had brought Zhenya here weekly for the last ten years. Ever since her grandfather had died and she had moved to her father’s.
 “Thank you, my child,” Elena Georgievna said. Toma was certain that Elena Georgievna had forgotten how to talk. That wasn’t so. She knew how to talk. But only here, in the latched bathroom, when Zhenya sat her in the warm water. There was an licable closeness between them. Zhenya had been raised by her grandfather. Granny had always been sresent and observed her tenderly. For as long as Zhenya could remember, her grandmother had been sick. And they had always loved each other, urely in the air and hinging on nothing else, could exist at all. Zhenya stroked her head.
 “Feel good? ”
 “Bliss. . . Lord, what bliss. . . In Siberia we all used to go to the bathhouse together—Pavel Alekseevich, Tanechka, Vasilisa. . . With birch branches. . . There was so much snow. . . Do you remember, child? ”
 “Who does she take me for? ” Zhenya thought. But essentially that did not make any difference. Once a week Elena Georgievna would utter several words. For but a few minutes her link with the here and now would be restored.
 “Why dantry? ” Zhenya asked.
 “Into the pantry? What difference does it make. . . Let it be.” Then confidentially: “Why didn’t you bring Tanechka with you? ” She shuddered and seemed confused.
 Zhenya suffered most at those times when she sensed that her granny was confused and bewildered. Zhenya soaped her sponge and ran ine. How should she answer? Sometimes it seemed to Zhenya that her grandmother took her for her deceased daughter. That, probably, was what  out addressed to her. . . But ened that Granny would call her“Mama. . .”
 “Is the water okay? It hasn’t cooled down, has it? ”
 “Very good. . . Thank you, cher: “Today some man shouted at me.”
 “Mikhail Fedorovich? Mikhail Fedorovich shouted at you? ”
 “No, child, he would never allow himself to do that. Someone else was shouting.”
 Zhenya pulled her head back sllaced her hand on her forehead.
 “We’re going to wash your hair. Squeeze your eyes t gets in.”
 Elena Georgievna obediently closed her eyes.
 Wht without the rubber ducks and the little boats. . .
 Then she saectedly:“Don’t be angry with Tomochka. She’s an orphan.”
 Zhenya had already rin so that it would not get in the way.
 “And who am I? And you? We’re all orphans. I don’t understand why she articular needs to be felt sorry for.”
 “My head is one big hole. It’s dlained.
 “Mine too,” Zhenya admitted. “Yesterday I turned the whole house upsent three hours looking for my documents. I couldn’t remember where I’d put them. Stand up, please. I’m going to rinse you with the shower, and then we’re done. . .”
 Zhenya helped Elena Georger rash that threatened with time to turn into bedsores, dressed her in a clean nightshirt and a clean robe. She wrapped the towel ing down the steamed mirror, she told her grandmother to take a look at herself.
 “See how beautiful you are.”
 Elena Georgievna shook her head and laughed. There icture ...
 2
 THE NEXT SUNDAY ZHENYA WAS NOT ABLE TO COME: THAT evenital. Durushed out: the baby’s head crowned. They—Zhenya and the baby—still constituted a single whole. The rendent movements. . .
 When she could no longer stand the paainful. . .” she thought able of thought. Thletely forgot. What der. . . put your hands on your chest. . . count to ten. . . don’t tense up. . . now shout. . . shout. . . good. . .”
 It was the most erfect of all natural mechanisms of giving birth—human childbirth. No other animal suffered as much. The paecial status in this world. The two-legged, straoreal love and that other variety, known only to human beings. The pr, some thought. Recompense for original sin, claimed others.
 The chubic arch. The pain was so unbearable that Zhenya’s world went black.
 The med her, saying,“Hey, Mommy! Everything’s fine. . . Just a losition.”
 Tears and sweat streamed over Zhenya’s face. The head tore through. He was already turning his shoulder, and the midwife, grabbing the wet, elongated head with both hands, coaxed the front shoulder forward. . .
 3
 ELENA DOZED ON HER BENTWOOD CHAIR WITH THE humiliating hole in the seat. She dreamed a dream: one br floor of the building. She wanted to look more closely to see who was standortant and joyous. In addle. What was so surprle could fit on that tiny balcony. More and more of them appeared, and suddenly, uffy mouth, and a girl resembling Tanechka or Zhenya or Tomochka, with an infant in her arms. Thosition, and Pavel Alekseevich took the infant into his arms and turned it so that it faced Elena. . . And this infant emanated light, sense, and all the joy of the world. As if in the middle of a sunny day another sun had risen. . . This infantbelonged to them all, and they to it. And Elena Georginess, just a tiny bit amazed that she could sense both the salty sweetness of her tears and her total disembodiment. . .
 4
 ON THE EVENING OF THE SAME DAY VITALY SET OUT FOR the Central Telegraph: for certahone. He and his father were connected very quickly. Ilya Ios the receiver, heard his son’s voice—quick, businesslike, without “hello” or “how are you doing.”
 “Zhenya gave birth to a son. Congratulations! You’ve got a great-grandson.” Werfluous comments.
 He did it within one minute. Then it took him twenty minutes to get through to Leningrad. He told Sergei that everything was all right. She’d had a boy, wlications.
 “Can I come to see her? ” Sergei asked.
 “Call Zhenya when she gets out of the maternital. Figure it out with her.”
 He felt no part with Zhenya. Whatever connectrehensible... Serge with this girl who had been his daughter for a few years. But he didn’t think about it. He took hosition, “Black Stones.”
 5
 ILYA IOSIFOVICH HAD DECIDED LONG AGO THAT HE WOULD go to Moscow when his great-grandson was born. The visa was ready. Valentina at first was categorically against it, but then gave in—under the condition that she go along. All that was left to do was order the tickets. Thelace. The younger one, the sixteen-year-old, brought from Russia when she was just an infant, they never left alone. She was a shy, rather strange little girl who loved cats and aquarium fish. They decend ten days living on her own.
 There was a bit of difficulty with Valentina’s job. She taught at Harvard Un and take a vacation. But her class was over in three weeks. As for Ilya Ios and leave whenever he wanted.
 The last three years he had been readarents had not sent him to heder as a child. Learning Hebrew at eighty-six was not easy. On the other hand, he’d never been frightened by difficulties. He dartner like Pavel Alekseevich. He spoke and even argued with him frequently in his head. Although he had to admtion, that Universal Higher Reason’s cosmic message to humankind. But humankreference for all varieties of Eastern hogwash—beginning with Chinese food and ending with karate. When he found out that Zhenya had glanningto travel to Moscow as a result, he was alarmed.
 “A tr like that at your age! You’re better off sending her the money! And I’m ready to...”
 But Ilya Iosifovich said firmly:“Don’t teach me how to live! The girl has a grandfather. I have a great-grandson. Too bad Pasha didn’t live to see the day.”
 Translator’s Afterword
 THE HISTORY OF THIS TRANSLATION IS WORTHY OF THE notebook of Chekhov’s Trigorin: “an idea for a short story.” But that is not what this afterword is about, or at least not entirely. I fublication a recommendation in its own right. In 2005, along wical. As frove, there is more to a great novel than the love story at its core.
 The love storisodes and great actors. Ulular among readers as diverse as her cast of characters. Tanya Kukotskaya’s Sovie friend Nanny Goat Vika or Vasilisa’s intellectual monastic mentor, Mother Anatolia, both would have likedThe Kukotsky Enigma, but for very different reasons. Certarinting and at the same time available free of cost online in Russian in the Russian Federation. But readers who focus on the love story alone will miss Ulitskaya’s true artistic innovation in this work.
 On the odd chance that someone wart 2. Throughout the rest of the book, Ulart 2. There Ulerience of the novel’s fictional reality as if they themselves were victims of Alzheimer’s disease. The process of memory (or the thwartrocess a twenty-first-century name.
 The novel’s title merits comment. In an odge orThe Kukotsky Enigma” Erfolg.ru. http://www.erfolg.ru/culture/ullaining what she meant byJourneys into the Seventh Dimension. Perhaps sublishers to release the novel asReise in den siebenten Himmel [Journey to Seventh Heaven]. In Russolysemous. The flied by the Russiankazus. Nelication of one of the definitions above.
 As wublication twice its size. In my translatelling them out, knowing that those so inclined will do extratextual research.
 The majortized. Most of the sarticular stages in the city’s history. Some of the places Ulitskaya names no longer exist, although their legacy remains in street names that now refer only to a memory. Each part of Moscow mentioned adds a dimension of characterization to events in the novel. The same laces named in Leningrad–St. Petersburg (Partment inCrime and Punishment. Loet.
 In Russart, unlabored and easy to read. She is also a master of dialogue. The accessast cultural monuments oblivious to their significance, in a kind of cultural amnesia. To the extent posslex syntax or unusual lexicon to signal disjunctions in the original Russian. Amerecific to Northwestern University Press. Transllified for readability. Names endhoneme (e.g., Tanya and Ilya). The metrlaced by the U.S. system of measurements. Place-names have been transllied in English.
 Thublished with Northwestern University Press, and the third that freelance editor Xenia Lisanevich and I have collaborated on. Not a few of the“eneated readings. The translateat “enigmatic”) text. To Xenia, Anne, and Jessica this translator owes much. Any onsibility. And, f://flibusta.net/b/563058
